[Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2018.02.008)

[Contents lists available at ScienceDirect](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03069192)
# Food Policy

[journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foodpol](https://www.elsevier.com/locate/foodpol)
## The political economy of labeling
### David Zilberman [⁎], Scott Kaplan, Ben Gordon

Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, UC Berkeley, United States


##### A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Labeling
Political economy

GMOs

Willingness to pay

1. Introduction

##### A B S T R A C T

Labeling arrangements are introduced to provide information and affect market outcomes. Mandatory labeling
of products like genetically-modified organisms (GMOs) is subject to controversy and political debate. The exact
outcome depends on the specific public decision-making process (direct vote by the public vs. voting by representatives), the political power distribution among groups, and the workings of legislative and regulatory
processes. This paper presents a conceptual framework to assess the welfare implications of labeling decisions
that are decided by political processes. We identify conditions under which there are gains from mandatory
labeling compared to no labeling, and find that the gain from passing a mandatory labeling proposition is larger
if the voluntary labeling option is not available. The conclusions suggest that when mandatory labeling is not
feasible politically, promoters of labeling will introduce voluntary labeling. The paper uses the results of this
conceptual framework to analyze different case studies of labeling propositions, including Proposition 37 that
was voted on in California in 2012. The findings suggest that labeling decisions may evolve with new scientific
knowledge, new information technologies, and changing attitudes.


A key condition for efficiency of markets is availability of full information, and one role of government is to establish a legal framework
that assures this (Mirrlees, 1974). Not only does this include price information, but has also recently expanded to include information about
product contents and quality, especially as the share of packaged goods
and complex equipment continues to increase (Dimara and Skuras,
2005). A key mechanism to providing information is labeling, and establishment of labeling policies and guidelines have been a major topic
of debate for centuries (Kolodinsky, 2012). The nature of information
sought by consumers is always changing, and industry and activists
have used labeling as a mechanism to affect market outcomes and resource allocation. Thus, to understand labeling, one needs to view it
from a political economic vantage point, where markets and political
mechanisms interact in establishing a final outcome (Vigani and Olper,
2015). One of the areas in which labeling policy is playing a major role
is in the bioeconomy, where labeling strongly affects the economics of
GM technologies, organic farming, and ultimately the viability of other
new technologies in the future.
This paper develops a conceptual model to understand voting outcomes about labeling and to assess their welfare implications. We address the welfare effects of both mandatory and voluntary labeling
schemes on different groups of consumers. We use this model to identify
conditions under which social welfare increases or decreases under

⁎ Corresponding author.
[E-mail address: zilber11@berkeley.edu (D. Zilberman).](mailto:zilber11@berkeley.edu)

[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2018.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2018.02.008)
Received 8 February 2018; Accepted 19 February 2018

Available online 28 February 2018
0306-9192/ © 2018 Published by Elsevier Ltd.


different labeling arrangements. The welfare model is based on the
notion of relative willingness-to-pay for “green” products vs. “brown”
products. The brown products produce more perceived environmental
and human health costs, and the consumer cannot distinguish between
the two different products unless there is explicit information or they
are labeled as such. Under reasonable assumptions, we are able to use
the differential in willingness-to-pay between these two products to
derive welfare outcomes under different labeling scenarios. We then use
the results of this model to inform a discussion about several case

studies relating to regulation of GM products, including Proposition 37,
which was voted on in California in 2012.

The first section of the paper will review the evolution of the use of
labeling and major considerations affecting private and public labeling
choices, followed by a discussion of alternative mechanisms of political
economy and their implications for labeling. This will be followed by an
analysis of how political economic considerations have affected the
economics of agricultural biotechnology. Finally, the paper will conclude.

2. Labeling over time

The need for labeling stems from the basic asymmetry of information about product quality between consumers and producers, which
may lead to suboptimal resource allocation without intervention
(Akerlof, 1970). The design of labeling policies balances considerations


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*


of consumer protection, industry profitability, consumer capacity to
absorb information, and ability to monitor and enforce. As food technologies and product choices evolve, labeling mechanisms and enforcement have evolved as well.

Food labeling in the US and globally has evolved over time. From
the 19th century until the 1970s, the focus of labeling policy was on
food safety and packaging. Historically, consumers would purchase
fresh products and process them at home. However, increased processing of foods introduced packaging and adulteration of products (for
example, replacement of butter with margarine and grape sugar with
beet sugar). A major political debate about food safety between activists
and industry in the early 20th century resulted in the passage of the
Pure Food Act of 1906. The publication of Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle
further steered the food safety debate, and contributed to the passage of
the Federal Meat Inspection Act of 1907 (Kolodinsky, 2012). The Pure
Food Act made it illegal to issue deceiving labels in terms of content,
weight, and serving measures. However, implementation of the law was
challenging and led to build-up of a bureaucracy that included the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), which is responsible for regulating
food safety, and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which regulates
food advertising, including labeling. The FTC initially emphasized
regulation of commerce, not consumer protection, but this changed
after the 1960s, especially with the passage of the 1966 Fair Packaging
and Labeling Act (Golan et al., 2001).
The increased reliance on processed and packaged food driven by
convenience and efficiency and the desire of businesses to differentiate
their products led to proliferation of food products and increased uncertainty about their contents (Senauer et al., 1991). This, along with
increased concern over healthy diets, led businesses to issue unsubstantiated health claims, resulting in the establishment of the Nutritional Guidelines in 1973 that over the years have grown to mandate
specific nutritional contents and restrict health claims about food. The
evolution of labeling policies during this period was affected by desire
to reduce costs and reduce regulatory load, concern about information
overload balanced with the desire to reduce negative side effects, as
well as new discoveries in terms of food science and measuring technologies. In the 1980s there were attempts to deregulate food safety as
well as emphasize precision in studying the health effects of different
foods, culminating in the 1997 FDA Modernization Act, which emphasized the role of science-based policies in supporting health claims
about food (Kolodinsky, 2012).
The 20th century has seen the build-up of the nutrition discipline,
including the discovery of the role of vitamins and minerals in health.
This led to nutritional and food labeling policies that emphasized improved health outcomes. During the first half of the century, much
emphasis was devoted to preventing and controlling diseases attributed
to nutritional deficiencies, while towards the end of the century, emphasis turned to chronic diseases. This was reflected in labeling policies
that emphasized information about nutritional content and concern
about carcinogens and toxins. Nutrition and labeling policies deserve
some of the credit for preventing any major food catastrophe in the US
during the second half of the century. However, newly discovered food
pathogens have emerged as threats needing to be addressed (Nutrition
Reviews, 1999).
Consumer concerns about the health attributes of food were augmented by concerns about food technology and production processes
during the beginning of the 20th century. The food sector has been
bifurcated, where most food production follows the industrial paradigm
but with a growing emphasis on the naturalization paradigm that emphasizes concerns about climate change, animal welfare, labor conditions, and the environment. The naturalization paradigm is appealing to
the more affluent segment of society and is growing as average income
is increasing (Rausser et al., 2015). However, the attributes pursued by
the naturalization paradigm lead to emphasis on credence goods whose
quality attributes cannot be easily observed. Therefore, these goods
often need to be identified using labels, and given asymmetric


information, require a network of monitoring and enforcement to avoid
cheating (McCluskey, 2000; Hamilton and Zilberman, 2006). Because
many of the attributes pursued by the naturalization paradigm, including organic, non-GMO, or Fair Trade, are not necessarily healthier
and are not valued equally among one another (i.e. non-GMO may be
valued more than Fair Trade), there has been an emergence of private
labeling and a system of organizations that aim to monitor accurate
labeling. Defining the role of firms, organizations, and government
regulators in this new environment is becoming a major policy challenge (Huffman and McCluskey, 2014b; Huffman and McCluskey, 2015;
Sheldon, 2017).
There are multiple decisions that need to be made about labeling
(Hemphill and Banerjee, 2015). Should they be mandatory, and if not,
should one establish voluntary labeling? What should be labeled, and
what are the quantitative limits of labeling? For example, what is the
degree of purity of GMO-free grain? Who will do the certification? How
should compliance be regulated, and what are the penalties for violation? These are some of the key questions that are required in establishing labeling regimes. These questions receive different answers depending on political systems.

3. Alternative approaches to political economy and implications
for labeling

Political systems and markets provide alternative mechanisms to
allocate resources. The political system sets constraints on markets by
regulations, and at the same time, market forces are affecting the determination of rules and regulations that are produced by politicians.
Political economic models aim to understand the basic mechanisms that

establish political parameters. However, there are many political mechanisms and systems, and each has their own decision rules that are
analyzed by different political economic models. We will analyze the
political economy of different mechanisms of policy-making with regards to labeling. In each case, we will analyze which major parties
affect each outcome, and some of the welfare implications of each potential outcome. First, we will analyze the political economy of voting
for labeling by the public. Then, we will consider the outcome of systems where elected politicians either vote or establish regulation.

3.1. Voting for labeling by the public

A major mechanism for public decision-making is voting, where
each voter decides whether or not to support a proposition, or abstain.
Downs (1957) introduced the median voter model, which assumes that
voters are heterogeneous and that results of a proposition are dependent on the median voter. The median voter model applies both to
referendums, where the general public votes on a proposition, as well as
parliamentary decisions, where politicians vote. Here, we will concentrate on referendums using a simple model of voting behavior and
analyze the welfare implications.
Referendums have been used in various states in the US to make

decisions about the introduction of mandatory labeling of GMOs. The
literature on labeling assumes that there are two products: brown and
green (Roe et al., 2014; Zilberman et al., 2014). The brown products
produce more environmental and human health costs, but the consumer
cannot distinguish between the two different products without additional information. Furthermore, there is heterogeneity among consumers in terms of their income as well as perception of damages from
the brown vs. green products. We consider four potential institutional
setups: the first is no labeling at all, the second is the introduction of a
mandatory ban on brown products, the third is mandatory labeling on
brown products, and the fourth is voluntary labeling on green products.
We acknowledge that there may be a realistic scenario with both
mandatory labeling on brown products and voluntary labeling on green
products.
For simplicity, assume that there are *N* total consumers in the


7


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*


market, and each consumer purchases one product (as in Rosen, 1974).
Suppose it is a necessity, like food, which has a very low price elasticity
of demand (here, we assume completely inelastic demand). There are
two varieties in the market: brown and green products, and consumers
cannot observe the difference unless the products are labeled as such.
Under full information, all consumers have a non-negative willingnessto-pay for green vs. brown products, which varies across consumers. In
order to define a baseline welfare from consumption (and to reinforce
the assumption that all consumers purchase a product in this market),
we assume that every individual derives a subsistence benefit *S* from
food consumption that is larger than the cost of providing the food. For
convenience, if the cost of providing the food is zero, *S* - 0, which
suggests that everyone purchases food and the decision becomes whether to buy a brown or green product. In addition to the subsistence
benefit *S* provided from food consumption, consumers receive an additional benefit from consuming the green product over the brown
product, *V x* *h* ( ) . [1] In other words, *V x* *h* ( ) denotes the extra willingness-topay for the green product over the brown product by consumer *x* in the
consumption decision due to individual-specific health and other considerations (denoted by subscript *h* ). Note that these individual-specific
considerations do not include environmental considerations, which will
be addressed later on. Since each consumer only purchases a single
product, we index the consumers from *x* ∈ [1, *N* ], where a lower *x*
corresponds to a consumer with higher additional willingness to pay for
the green product. Let *C* 0 denote the difference in per unit costs between the green and brown products (we assume constant marginal
costs for each product), which we assume to be positive. In the absence
of fixed costs, this assumption implies that marginal cost is equal to perunit cost. In the scenario with no labeling, all of the consumers will buy
brown products, since there is no way for the consumer to differentiate
between the products and the brown product is produced at a lower
price than the green product. Let *X* *b* and *X* *g* be the amount of brown
product and green product purchased, respectively, where
*X* *b* + *X* *g* = *N* . Then, under scenario *W* (without labeling and no information), *X* *bW* = *N* .
In an ideal world with full information, if both green and brown
products are available, consumers with *V x* *h* ( ) ⩾ *C* 0 [will choose the green]
product, and the equilibrium level of green product sold will be *X* *gF*,
where subscript *F* represents the full information scenario. Looking at
Fig. 1, the welfare gain from full information is the area denoted by

*ABC* 0 . Labeling is introduced because the consumers cannot distinguish
between green and brown products, and it will require an additional
cost to purchase the green product. The difference is that the producer
and consumer of green products pay for the information cost under
voluntary labeling, and the producer and consumer of brown products
pay under mandatory labeling. We denote the mandatory and voluntary
labeling scenarios as *M* and *V*, and the additional per-unit costs as *C* *V*
and *C* *M*, respectively.
Before we discuss the impact of labeling, suppose we introduce a
mandatory ban on brown products. We denote this scenario with *A* as
the subscript. Thus, since we assume all consumers purchase one product, *X* *gA* = *N*, and all consumers pay additional per unit cost *C* 0 . In this
case, consumers know they are buying a green product, and all consumers with *V x* *h* ( ) - *C* 0 [gain, while those with] *V x* *h* ( ) < *C* 0 [lose. In][ Fig. 1][,]
all of the consumers with *V x* *h* ( ) - *C* 0 [(to the left of] *[ B]* [) will gain, and]
their total welfare gain is represented by *ABC* 0 . The consumers with
lower willingness to pay will lose, and their welfare loss is *BDNE* . A ban
is beneficial if *ABC* 0 - *BDNE*, and vice versa.
When we consider labeling, we allow coexistence of the two technologies, and impose an extra cost on suppliers of one of the technologies. Suppose we introduce mandatory labeling. Then, the cost of labeling will be passed completely onto consumers of the brown product

1 When comparing the welfare effects of different labeling scenarios to one another, the

subsistence benefit *S* cancels out.


(since producers face a completely inelastic demand for the product).
When a consumer determines whether to buy the green vs. brown
product, she compares the net gain from the green product, which is

*V x* *h* ( )− *C* 0 [to the extra cost associated with the brown product because of]
labeling, which is *C* *M* . Thus, the *x* *[th]* consumer will buy green if

*V x* *h* ( ) - *C* 0 − *C* *M* . Let *X* *gM* be the total quantity of the green product sold
in the case of mandatory labeling, and is determined where
*V x* *h* ( ) = *C* 0 − *C* *M* . In Fig. 2, all of the consumers to the left of *F* will
consume the green product, and all of the consumers to the right will
consume the brown product.
Thus, the welfare effects of mandatory labeling compared to no
labeling is a gain for buyers of the green product, represented by the
area *ABC* 0 (which is identical to the gain for buyers of the green product
under a mandatory ban of brown products), a loss of *HINX* *gM* for individuals who continue to buy the brown product, and finally a loss of
*BKF* for the individuals that switch from brown to green products because of the additional cost imposed by labeling. The reason why the
consumers of the green product continue to gain *ABC* 0 is because they
continue to pay the same amount for the green product as before. The
consumers that now switch from purchasing the brown product to
purchasing the green product (those that fall in between *X* *gF* and *X* *gM* )
lose *BKF* because they now must purchase the green product for an
additional cost *C* 0, which is higher than their additional WTP for the
green product, instead of purchasing the brown product. The welfare
loss represented by *HINX* *gM* for individuals that continue to buy the
brown product is due to the introduction of the cost of mandatory labels
for these products.
Now, consider the introduction of voluntary labeling on green
products (when the baseline is no labeling). In this case, the consumers
of the green products pay the additional per unit cost of labeling, so the
new price compared to the brown product is *C* 0 + *C* *V* . The consumers
that will buy the green product under this scenario are the ones with

*V x* *h* ( ) (− *C* 0 + *C* *V* ) ⩾ 0, and the quantity of green products sold is *x* *gV*,
where *V x* *h* ( ) (− *C* 0 + *C* *V* ) = 0 . In Fig. 3, the consumers buying the green
product will be to the left of *x* *gV* . The welfare gain from introduction of
voluntary labeling compared to scenario *W* (no information) is the area
denoted by *AJ C* ( 0 + *C* *V* ) .
There is a social welfare gain from mandatory labeling relative to
voluntary labeling if the welfare loss of brown product consumers
under mandatory labeling, which is *BKF* + *HINX* *gM*, is less than the
additional welfare gain of green product consumers under mandatory
labeling, which is the area denoted by ( *C* 0 + *C* *V* ) *JBC* 0 [. This analysis]
suggests that the likelihood of a gain from mandatory labeling relative
to voluntary labeling increases as the difference between *C* *V* and *C* *M*
increases, and the larger is the share of the population with high willingness to pay for green vs. brown.
Now, suppose the population has to vote on mandatory labeling,
and we consider two baselines. In the first scenario, the baseline is no
information. Assume that everyone votes, and individuals vote according to the impact of mandatory labeling on their welfare.
Individuals with high willingness to pay for the green product, i.e.

*V x* *h* ( )− *C* 0 ⩾ 0, will benefit from mandatory labeling. But, the rest of the
population will lose. The individuals between *X* *gF* and *X* *gM* will not be
willing to pay for the additional cost of mandatory labeling, and thus
will switch from buying the brown product to the green product, and
the *x* *[th]* individual in this region incurs a loss of *C* 0 − *V x* *h* ( ) . The individuals with willingness to pay that is lower than *C* 0 − *C* *M* will lose *C* *M*
per unit purchased. The proposition will pass if the median voter, denoted *x* *MD* has high willingness to pay for the green product,
*V x* *h* ( *MD* ) - *C* 0 [, and] *x* *MD* ⩽ *x* *gF* [.]
Under the no information baseline, if there is a large share of the
population that is willing to pay very little or nothing for the green
product vs. the brown product, then the proposition is not likely to pass.
The higher is the cost differential between the green and brown product, the less likely the proposition is to pass. Note, however, that under
this scenario, the cost of mandatory labeling does not affect the


8


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*

Fig. 1. Welfare impact of a ban on brown products.

Fig. 2. Welfare impact of mandatory labeling on brown products.


outcome. Furthermore, there may be a situation where the proposition
will pass, but it will result in a welfare loss. For example, this will occur
when *x* *MD* ⩽ *x* *gF* [, but where the aggregate gain of the individuals that]
now purchase the green product because their willingness to pay is
greater than the cost differential, *ABC* 0, is smaller than the loss from
those that purchase the brown product, *HINX* *gM*, and those that switch
from brown to green to avoid paying the extra labeling cost, *BKF* .
Now, consider the second situation, where the baseline is voluntary
labeling, and if the proposition for mandatory labeling passes, there is a
switch from voluntary labeling to mandatory labeling. Individuals that
purchase the green product under voluntary labeling, with *x* ⩽ *x* *gV*, will
save *C* *V* per unit if the mandatory labeling proposition passes, and they
will vote for it. Individuals between *x* *gV* and *x* *gF* will switch to the green
product because they will not need to pay *C* *V*, and will also vote for the
proposition. The rest of the population, who buys the brown product,
will vote against the proposition. As in the previous case, the proposition will pass if the median voter’s additional willingness-to-pay for the
green vs. brown product is larger than the cost differential between the
two products, i.e. *V x* *h* ( *MD* ) - *C* 0 [, and if] *x* *MD* ⩽ *x* *GF* [. However, the gain]


from voting for mandatory labeling is smaller when the benchmark is
voluntary labeling than when the benchmark is no information. In this
case, the gain is equal to the area denoted by ( *C* 0 + *C* *V* ) *JBC* 0, and it is
larger the greater is the cost of voluntary labeling. The analysis suggests
that individuals with high willingness to pay for the green product will
benefit from the passing of the mandatory labeling proposition, while
individuals with low willingness to pay will lose. The gain from the
passing of the proposition is larger if the voluntary labeling option is
not available.

3.1.1. Further political economic implications
Our analysis only considers the perceived health benefits from green
vs. brown products. But in many cases, individuals will consider the
environmental risks associated with brown products, which in their
view may be substantial. Hamilton et al. (2003) show that these environmental considerations may affect voting behavior rather than
purchasing behavior. Let *V x* *e* ( ) denote the per-unit willingness to pay for
external (environmental) benefits from green vs. brown products. These
are benefits accrued to the consumer independent of the consumption


9


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*

Fig. 3. Welfare impact of voluntary labeling on green products.


choice. Now, voters consider both the health gains from switching from
brown to green as well as the environmental benefits. While the passage
of the proposition will not change the consumption pattern once taking
into account *V x* *e* ( ), it will affect voting outcomes. Individuals with high
perceived health gains from green products, *V x* *h* ( ) - *C* 0 [, will vote for]
the proposition solely based on personal health considerations. But,
some individuals with lower perceived health gains may vote for it as
well. Individuals who continue to buy brown products after the passage
of the proposition (this is the group where *x* - *x* *gM* ) will vote for it as
long as *V x* *e* ( ) - *C* *M* [, since their consumption choice is una][ff][ected by the]
passage of the proposition. Individuals that will switch from the brown
to green product after the proposition will vote for the proposition if

*V x* *h* ( ) + *V x* *e* ( ) - *C* 0 [, because in this case consumers][’][ willingness-to-pay]
includes both the external benefits and from direct consumption. To
apply the median voter theorem to this case will require constructing a
new ordering of the population according to their willingness to vote
for the proposition, which is beyond the scope of this paper.
There have been studies that have analyzed the welfare effects of
labels, especially in how they affect different groups of consumers and
producers (Bonroy and Constantatos, 2015). We acknowledge that the
model presented in this paper abstracts away from important considerations that have to be accounted for in a more complete political
economic analysis. We assume that the consumers have full information
about the gains from the green product vs. the brown product, as well
as the cost of labeling. The reality is that these two pieces of information are uncertain, and campaigning before the vote aims, to a large
extent, to provide information about these benefits and costs to the
voter (Graff et al., 2009; Huffman and McCluskey, 2014a). Consumers
will be divided, and the individuals with higher preference for green
products will contribute to the campaign to pass the proposition. The
passing of the proposition will increase the sale of the green product,
and therefore the manufacturers of the green products will contribute to
the campaign to pass the proposition. On the other hand, the producers
of the brown products will support the campaign against the proposition. Since the introduction of the proposition will require labeling,
organizations that provide certification and verification will contribute
to the passage of the proposition, especially when the baseline is no
information. [2] Even if the proposition fails, it may raise awareness about
the risk of the brown product, increasing the likelihood of voluntary

2 Even though a realistic baseline may include some information about product dif
ferentiation.


labeling and benefitting the certifiers. Furthermore, if environmental
considerations are important, then environmental groups will be strong
supporters for the passage of the proposition. Thus, the political debate
of propositions is, to a large extent, a debate on the consequences of
implementing the proposition for different groups (Vigani and Olper,
2013; Banerjee and Murray, 2015).

Zilberman et al. (2014) analyze the debate prior to California’s
Proposition 37 in 2012 that would have required labeling of GM products in the state. Three months before the vote, polls showed a wide
margin of support for the proposition (above 60%). During this stage,
most of the debate was about the health and environmental impacts of
the proposition. Once there was mention of the option to have voluntary labeling in lieu of mandatory labeling, support for Proposition 37
was slightly reduced. But during the final months, opposition to the
proposition introduced evidence that it would be costly (about $100 per
capita per year), and this seemed to have tipped the scales and contributed to the defeat of the proposition. The paper suggests that the
opposition had more resources and deployed them more heavily towards the end of the campaign period, showing that intensity and
timing of messaging matters. But, it is clear that providing clarity of
impacts in quantitative terms matters quite a lot to voters. Zilberman
et al. (2014) find that organic growers associations and environmental
groups have been major supporters of the mandatory labeling propositions, while biotechnology firms were among the major contributors
to the “No” campaign, just as the model in this paper predicts. Major
food retailers also supported this campaign – to some extent to avoid
the tough penalties that were associated with violation of the labeling
mandate proposed in California. The anti-labeling campaign had much
larger financial support than the pro-labeling side, but the latter relied
more heavily on volunteers and labor-intensive campaigning.
Many studies have also looked at voting behavior and other implications associated with the results of Proposition 37 in California.
Bovay and Alston (2016) find that given voting patterns for Proposition
37 in California, only Hawaii, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington
D.C. would have passed the proposition had it been on their ballot in
2012. Additionally, while Proposition 37 was rejected by a narrow
margin, it has spurred other state and municipal level initiatives regarding the regulation of biotechnology (Clark et al., 2014; Bain and
Dandachi, 2014).
The political debate on labeling is not only whether or not to have
mandatory labeling, but also a decision regarding the parameters of
implementing and enforcing the mandatory labeling policy. These


10


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*


parameters include intensity of monitoring to detect cheating and the
penalty for doing so. If the probability of being caught misrepresenting
brown products as green products times the penalty for cheating is
lower than the price premium of green over brown products, a risk
neutral producer will elect to cheat. So, higher penalties and effective
monitoring may deter cheating behavior. Supporters of mandatory labeling, including producers of green products, will support strict
monitoring and enforcement. Green product producers will have an
even stronger incentive to do so in cases where demand for the green
product is price sensitive, and thus increased supply of green products
by cheaters is likely to reduce its price (Hamilton and Zilberman, 2006).
Since consumers are loss averse when it comes to being disappointed
and cheated with regards to product quality, consumers that value the
green products will strongly support tough monitoring and enforcement
of labeling standards.
Other parameters determined in labeling policy-making are the
type, size, prominence, and content of labels (Crespi and Marette,
2003). In the case of cigarettes, where there is ample scientific evidence
of major health effects, the mandatory labels are prominent, very large,
and often intimidating. But there is no scientific basis for the use of
alarming, or even mildly deterring labels when it comes to GM products. The National Academies of Sciences have found GMOs to present
no new risks compared to other forms of plant breeding, and their introduction has contributed to economic and even environmental ben
efits (Barrows et al., 2014; Klümper and Qaim, 2014; Paarlberg, 2009).
Hemphill and Banerjee (2014) suggest that the labels proposed in major
propositions for mandatory labeling of GMOs are frequently alarming,
which may be misleading to consumers. Opponents of GMOs may use
mandatory labeling as a mechanism to reduce demand for them. On the
other hand, supporters may not oppose labeling as a source of information, per se, but are against labels used as a signal to alarm
consumers and reduce demand. The efforts to establish alarming
mandatory labels are conducted frequently as part of efforts to ban
GMOs altogether. One solution proposed by Liaukonyte et al. (2013) is
to provide secondary information (through access to detailed information sources about characteristics of the products) when mandatory labeling is introduced, yet there is a limit to consumers’ ability to
absorb information. McFadden and Lusk (2016) found that a large share
of consumers may not be well-informed about GMOs, and prefer that
decisions about GM food be taken out of their hands and put into those
of experts. The recent US Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015
US Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015 required mandatory
labeling of GMOs, but allowed companies to use scannable barcodes or
toll-free numbers as a form of labeling. This middle ground allows
consumers who feel strongly about GMOs in these products to learn
more about them, while allowing others to trust decisions made by
experts with regards to these products.
Propositions for mandatory labeling of GMOs have emerged in
many US states between 2010 and 2016. Most have failed to pass, but
when Vermont passed a proposition in 2014, it presented an implementation challenge due to the high cost and difficulty of complying
with different labeling standards in different states. The Senate decided
to interfere in order to create a uniform policy that combines a multitude of considerations. However, the political economy mechanisms
that govern choices by legislators and regulators are different than the
ones affecting the public when voting.

3.2. Labeling by legislators and regulators

Thus far we discussed labeling choices by voters, but many important voting decisions are made by regulators or legislators (i.e. the
US Organic Foods Production Act of 1990 with similar acts in Europe
like the EU-Eco-regulation no. 2092 of 1991). Legislatures frequently
give executive agencies, like the USDA, the right to establish and enforce standards for labeling.
There are different structures of governance, and they result in


varying models of political economic behavior. In the US and England,
for example, the legislative branches consist of representatives who
represent regions and vote on proposals. These representatives aim to
increase their likelihood of staying in power, which will depend on
their ability to appeal to different voting blocks and obtain resources for
campaigns. Lobbyists are aware of this behavior, and provide campaign
contributions accordingly (Peltzman, 1984). Therefore, in voting, legislators will weigh the interests of different groups (e.g. consumers,
producers, environmentalists) differently based on their ability to
garner voter and campaign contributions. For example, representatives
of rural regions that grow GM products will not be inclined to support
mandatory labeling, while representatives of regions with a large environmentalist constituency will support such labeling. In the United
States, agricultural interests may gain relatively more weight in the
Senate than the House of Representatives because they represent regions rather than people (Rausser et al., 2011). Therefore, we may
expect that states with a majority of people who support environmental
values will pass mandatory labeling, but the House and Senate, which
have representatives from diverse regions and must balance different
interest groups, may establish national policies like the Accurate Food
Labeling Act that requires labels not to be alarming. This compromise
respects the freedom of information, but takes into account the opinions
of the National Academies of Sciences and is not damaging to the interests of farmers, agribusiness, and consumers that want to leave the
decision to experts.
The explicit modeling of political economic behavior can be quite
complex, but the outcomes can imply the representative weights of
different groups in the political system (Grossman and Helpman, 1992).
While the net change in welfare of different groups from labeling decisions can be quantified in dollar-equivalent units, actual political
choices suggest that the political weights of groups are different. For
example, according to Kuntz (2014), the restrictive policies of GMOs in
France, especially after the election of Sarkozy in 2007, reflected the
capacity of Green groups to obtain power and representation in policymaking and assessment forums compared to seed companies that were
excluded from such forums. Herring and Paarlberg (2016) present the
rich literature on political economy of GMOs, emphasizing the relatively significant powers of NGOs and other groups opposed to GMOs in
policy debates that have led to bans and restrictions, especially on
production of GM crops. Regions with tougher restrictions on GMOs are
also more likely to have mandatory labeling.

4. Political economy of voluntary labeling

Mandatory labeling has been used to report weights and measures,
nutritional content, and inform consumers about hazardous ingredients. When the introduction of mandatory labeling is politically
infeasible, or the capacity to produce green products is limited and
there must be coexistence between green and brown labels, voluntary
labeling is established instead. Establishment of voluntary labeling requires the concurrent establishment of standards of purity and mechanisms of monitoring. A small portion of brown product characteristics may be present in a green product, so to declare a product as
green, an authority has to determine the concentration threshold (e.g.
the maximum fraction of GM grains qualified to be a GMO-free product), and enforce and certify it. The demand for green products is
dependent on the trust in the certifiers and implementers of the standards (Golan et al., 2001). When public sector scientific and government institutions are sufficiently trusted, the initiator of establishing a
green label is likely to prefer that government agencies be involved in
establishing the standard and engage in monitoring and enforcement.
But government resources are limited; thus, obtaining government
support for labeling is a challenge. Establishing such standards requires
that supporters of the labeling, which may include producers of green
products, environmental groups, consumers, and others, overcome objections of both producers of brown products as well as people


11


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*


concerned about higher costs. The organic farming concept, pioneered
by Sir Albert Howard in England in the 1940s, was popularized by
Jerome Rodale in the US, and the diffusion of the approach and political
savvy of the organic movement led to passage of the Federal Organic
Foods Production Act in 1990 (which established the USDA-supported
organic farming program) and laws behind USDA “Certified Organic” in
2002. The accreditation of the certified organic label by the USDA
(where the products are subjected to an inspection by a USDA-accredited certifying agent) is a major political achievement for the organic
movement (Heckman, 2006). It is consistent with Olson (1971) that
relatively small groups of motivated individuals can lobby effectively in
a democracy to achieve a shared political objective.
Most certified voluntary labels are not part of a government policy
action but are privately managed arrangements. These labels frequently
originate from an ideology or philosophy that identifies properties of
desirable or undesirable products. These ideas are popularized and then
implemented by defining concrete labeling criteria and establishing an
NGO to provide certification of the label and, at times, monitoring
adherence to it. Producers or distributers of the product pay fees for the
right to display the label, and the fees are used to market the label as
well as cover the costs of monitoring and implementing extra activities
required by the label. Low and Davenport (2006) show that the history
of “Fair Trade” is consistent with this dynamic pattern. Bartley (2003)
analyzes the emergence of private regulations based on labeling and
certification since the 1990s to address environmental and labor issues

in forest products and apparel industries. He shows that these private
arrangements are the results of campaigns by social movements,
sometimes targeting major companies like Nike and the neo-liberal
institutional context, which emphasizes free trade and an increased role
for the private sector, including private regulation. Governments may
support voluntary labeling by giving tax exemptions, research support,
and preferential purchasing to the civil society organizations that
manage the labels of these products.
Some of the most important food labeling schemes were introduced
for food products produced in compliance with religious laws (e.g.
Halal and Kosher). Several religious groups have succeeded in legalizing food preparation (in particular animal slaughter) based on the
religious practices in many countries across the world. The certification
of Halal and Kosher labels are done by religious authorities. Differences
in demographics and politics explain differences in the involvement of
the state in enforcing Kosher and Halal labels (Having 2010). In
Holland and some other European countries, the religious authorities
have full autonomy in monitoring and enforcement of Halal and Kosher
labels. In the United States, the state plays a major role in the regulation
of Kosher certification, and several states (especially those with large
Jewish populations) have a special Kosher enforcement agency. In
Israel, where religious parties are strong, there is han official government-sanctioned Kosher label, and there is mandatory enforcement of
Kosher procedure by individuals in the army.

5. Conclusions

Labeling arrangements are introduced to provide information and
affect market outcomes. The specifics of design of labels and labeling
programs are subject to political activities affecting regulations and
policies. Mandatory labels tend to be introduced to provide information
about basic content (weight, size, and caloric content) and to warn
against use of products that have been proven to cause harm under
some circumstances. Mandatory labeling of products like GMOs, which
are deemed safe by the majority of scientists but are held suspect by
many environmentalist groups and others, is subject to controversy and
political debate. The exact outcome depends on the specific public
decision-making process (direct vote by the public vs. voting by representatives), the political power distribution among groups, and the
workings of legislative and regulatory processes in different governments. In the case of GM varieties, production is practically banned in


Europe, and mandatory labeling for these products is strictly enforced.
On the other hand, new mandatory labeling schemes in the US are less
strict and less intimidating. One reason for this dichotomy is the
stronger Green lobbies and weaker industry commitment to the technology in EU.
This paper has developed a simple conceptual framework that utilizes a welfare approach to understand the impact of different labeling
schemes on the well-being of different consumer groups. We find that
mandatory labeling is more likely to be preferred to a baseline of no
information the larger the share of people that prefer green to brown
products, and the more they are willing to pay for these products.
Additionally, we find that the gain from the passing of a mandatory
labeling proposition is larger if the voluntary labeling option is not
available. However, when mandatory labeling is not feasible politically,
promoters of labeling will introduce voluntary labeling. They will strive
for government oversight and management of the voluntary labels, and
for as much government support as possible in terms of research,
education, and an enabling legal environment. With increasing consumer awareness of food production practices and concerns about the
growing role of government, the role of civil society in administering
many aspects of voluntary labeling will increase. Labeling decisions
may evolve with new scientific knowledge, new information technologies, and changing attitudes. Research quantifying the effects of labeling on demand and welfare of various groups, as well as the factors
affecting labeling choices, are in early stages and should be expanded

upon.

References

[Akerlof, George A., 1970. The market for ‘Lemons’: quality uncertainty, and the market](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0005)
[mechanism. Quart. J. Econ. 84, 488–500.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0005)
[Bain, C., Dandachi, T., 2014. Governing GMOs: the (counter) movement for mandatory](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0010)
[and voluntary non-GMO labels. Sustainability 6 (12), 9456–9476.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0010)
[Barrows, G., Sexton, S., Zilberman, D., 2014. Agricultural biotechnology: the promise and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0015)
[prospects of genetically modified crops. J. Econ. Perspect. 28 (1), 99–119.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0015)
[Banerjee, T., Murray, J., 2015. What shapes corporate involvement in voter referendums?](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0020)
[The case of opposition to gm food labeling. Sociol. Perspect. 58 (3), 464–489.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0020)
[Bartley, Tim, 2003. Certifying forests and factories: states, social movements, and the rise](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0025)
[of private regulation in the apparel and forest products fields. Polit. Soc. 31 (3),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0025)
[433–464.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0025)

[Bonroy, O., Constantatos, C., 2015. On the economics of labels: how their introduction](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0030)
[affects the functioning of markets and the welfare of all participants. Am. J. Agric.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0030)
[Econ. 97 (1), 239–259.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0030)
[Bovay, J., Alston, J.M., 2016. GM labeling regulation by plebiscite: analysis of voting on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0035)
[proposition 37 in California. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 41 (2), 161–188.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0035)
[Clark, L.F., Ryan, C.D., Kerr, W.A., 2014. Direct democracy, state governments, and the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0040)
[re-energized GMO debate: implications of California's Proposition 37. AgBioForum](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0040)
[16 (3), 177–186.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0040)
[Crespi, J.M., Marette, S., 2003. “Does contain” vs. “Does Not Contain”: does it matter](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0045)
[which GMO label is used? Eur. J. Law Econ. 16 (3), 327–344.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0045)
[Dimara, Efthalia, Skuras, Dimitris, 2005. Consumer demand for informative labeling of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0050)
[quality food and drink products: a European Union case study. J. Consum. Market. 22](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0050)
[(2), 90–100.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0050)
[Downs, Anthony, 1957. An economic theory of political action in a democracy. J. Polit.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0055)
[Econ. 65 (2), 135–150.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0055)
[Golan, Elise, Kuchler, Fred, Mitchell, Lorraine, Greene, Cathy, Jessup, Amber, 2001.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0060)
[Economics of food labeling. J. Consum. Pol. 24 (2), 117–184.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0060)
[Graff, G.D., Hochman, G., Zilberman, D., 2009. The political economy of agricultural](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0065)
[biotechnology policies. AgBioForum 12 (1), 34–46.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0065)
Grossman, G.M., Helpman, E., 1992. Protection for sale (No. 4149). National Bureau of
Economic Research.

[Hamilton, Stephen F., Zilberman, David, 2006. Green markets, eco-certification, and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0075)
[equilibrium fraud. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 52 (3), 627–644.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0075)
[Hamilton, Stephen F., Sunding, David L., Zilberman, David, 2003. Public goods and the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0085)
[value of product quality regulations: the case of food safety. J. Pub. Econ. 87 (3),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0085)
[799–817.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0085)

[Heckman, Joseph, 2006. A history of organic farming: transitions from Sir Albert](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0090)
[Howard's War in the Soil to USDA National Organic Program. Renew. Agric. Food](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0090)
[Syst. 21 (3), 143–150.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0090)
[Hemphill, T.A., Banerjee, S., 2015. Genetically modified organisms and the US retail food](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0095)
[labeling controversy: consumer perceptions, regulation, and public policy. Bus. Soc.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0095)
[Rev. 120 (3), 435–464.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0095)
[Herring, Ronald, Paarlberg, Robert, 2016. The political economy of biotechnology. Ann.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0100)
[Rev. Resour. Econ. 8, 397–416.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0100)
[Hemphill, Thomas A., Banerjee, Syagnik, 2014. Mandatory food labeling for GMOs.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0105)
[Regulation 37, 7.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0105)
[Huffman, W.E., McCluskey, J.J., 2014a. The economics of labeling GM foods.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0110)


12


-----

D. Zilberman et al. *Food Policy 78 (2018) 6–13*


[AgBioForum 17 (2), 156–160.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0110)
Huffman, W.E., McCluskey, J.J., 2014b. Labeling of genetically modified foods.
Handbook on Agriculture, Biotechnology and Development, 467.
[Huffman, W., McCluskey, J., 2015. Food labels, information, and trade in GMOs. J. Agric.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0120)
[Food Ind. Org. 15 (1).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0120)
[Klümper, Wilhelm, Qaim, Matin, 2014. A meta-analysis of the impacts of genetically](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0125)
[modified crops. PloS One 9 (11), e111629.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0125)
[Kolodinsky, J., 2012. Persistence of health labeling information asymmetry in the United](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0130)
[States: historical perspectives and twenty-first century realities. J. Macromarket. 32](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0130)
[(2), 193–207.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0130)
[Kuntz, M., 2014. The GMO case in France: politics, lawlessness and postmodernism. GM](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0135)
[Crops Food 5 (3), 163–169.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0135)
[Liaukonyte, J., Streletskaya, N.A., Kaiser, H.M., Rickard, B.J., 2013. Consumer response](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0140)
[to “contains” and “free of” labeling: evidence from lab experiments. Appl. Econ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0140)
[Perspect. Pol. ppt015.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0140)
[McFadden, Brandon R., Lusk, Jayson L., 2016. What consumers don’t know about ge-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0145)
[netically modified food, and how that affects beliefs. FASEB J. 30 (9), 3091–3096.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0145)
[McCluskey, Jill, 2000. A game theoretic approach to organic foods: an analysis of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0155)
[asymmetric information and policy. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 29 (1), 1–9.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0155)
[Mirrlees, James, 1974. Notes on welfare economics, information and uncertainty. Essays](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0160)
[Econ. Behav. Uncertainty 243–261.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0160)
Nutrition Reviews, 1999. ‘Special Article: Twentieth Century Nutrition, Public Health
Nutrition and Food Safety, 1900–1999, 57 (12), 368–372.
Olson, Mancur, 1971. The logic of collective action: public goods and the theory of
groups, second printing with new preface and appendix (Harvard Economic Studies).
[Paarlberg, R., 2009. Starved for Science: How Biotechnology is Being Kept Out of Africa.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0175)


[Harvard University Press.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0175)
[Peltzman, S., 1984. Constituent interest and congressional voting. J. Law Econ. 27 (1),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0180)
[181–210.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0180)

[Rausser, G.C., Swinnen, J., Zusman, P., 2011. Political Power and Economic Policy:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0185)
[Theory, Analysis, and Empirical Applications. Cambridge University Press.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0185)
[Rausser, G., Zilberman, D., Kahn, G., 2015. An alternative paradigm for food production,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0190)
[distribution, and consumption: a noneconomist’s perspective. Ann. Rev. Resour.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0190)
[Econ. 7 (1), 309–331.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0190)
[Roe, B.E., Teisl, M.F., Deans, C.R., 2014. The economics of voluntary versus mandatory](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0195)
[labels. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 6 (1), 407–427.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0195)
[Rosen, Sherwin, 1974. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0200)
[pure competition. J. Polit. Econ. 82 (1), 34–55.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0200)
[Senauer, Ben, Asp, Elaine, Kinsey, Jean, 1991. Food Trends and the Changing Consumer.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0205)
[Eagan Press, St. Paul, MN.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0205)
[Sheldon, I., 2017. Certification mechanisms for credence attributes of foods: does it](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0210)
[matter who provides diagnosis? Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 9 (1).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0210)
United States Congress. H.R. 1599 – Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015. 114th
Congress, 2015–2016.
[Vigani, M., Olper, A., 2013. GMO standards, endogenous policy and the market for in-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0220)
[formation. Food Pol. 43, 32–43.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0220)
[Vigani, M., Olper, A., 2015. Patterns and determinants of GMO regulations: an overview](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0225)
[of recent evidence. AgBioForum 18 (1), 44–54.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0306-9192(18)30103-9/h0225)
Zilberman, D., Kaplan, S., Kim, E., Waterfield, G., 2014. Lessons from the California GM
labeling proposition on the state of crop biotechnology. In: Handbook on Agriculture,
Biotechnology and Development, Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, pp. 538–549.


13


-----

