Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102

DOI 10.1007/s11869-010-0079-2
# Effects of air pollution on the respiratory health of children: a study in the capital city of India

Shabana Siddique & Manas R. Ray & Twisha Lahiri

Received: 31 March 2010 /Accepted: 22 June 2010 /Published online: 13 July 2010
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010


Abstract Urban air pollutants cause a wide range of acute
and chronic effects on the respiratory system of children
that can be devastating. In this study, the respiratory health
of children was assessed in the capital city of India where
the level of air pollution is much above the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards. The study was carried out
in Delhi, and the findings were compared with those of
rural West Bengal and Uttaranchal. The prevalence of
respiratory symptoms was determined through a structured
respiratory symptomlogy questionnaire and personal interviews. Air quality data were collected from Central and
State Pollution Control Boards and also obtained by direct
measurements using a portable aerosol monitor. Based on
the data collected on the cohort of children participating in
this study, 32.1% of children in Delhi suffered from
respiratory problems in contrast to 18.2% of rural children
(control). The respiratory symptoms were more prevalent in
girls than in boys. A strong, statistically significant positive
association was observed between PM 10 level in Delhi’s air
and the prevalence of lower respiratory tract symptoms.

S. Siddique (*)
Air Contaminants Lab, Exposure and Biomonitoring Division,
Environmental Health, Science & Research Bureau,
Health Canada (AL-0800C),
B-36, 50 Columbine Driveway, Tunneys Pasture,
Ottawa K1A 0K9 ON, Canada
e-mail: shim23@gmail.com

M. R. Ray
Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute,
Kolkata, India

T. Lahiri

Nature, Environment & Wildlife Society (NEWS),
Kolkata, India


Keywords Air pollution [. ] Children [. ] Delhi [. ] PM 10 [.]
Respiratory health

Introduction

Epidemiological studies throughout the world have established a close association between urban air pollution and
human diseases (Dockery et al. 1993; Samet et al. 2000). Air
pollution is a complex mixture of various gases, particulates,
hydrocarbons, and transition metals. Of all these pollutants,
the association between air pollution and adverse health
conditions is strongest and most consistent for respirable
suspended particulate matter (RSPM) with an aerodynamic
diameter <10 μm (PM 10 ). The health risk from particulate
pollution is high for some susceptible groups such as the
children and the elderly persons, and those with diseases of
the heart and lungs (Ulrich et al. 2002).
Diseases of the lungs and the airways are often manifested
by one or more symptoms that can be easily recognized. Thus,
the presence of a particular symptom or a group of symptoms
can confirm the presence of an underlying disease in the upper
or lower airways. Respiratory symptoms are classified into
two broad groups: (1) upper respiratory symptoms (URS),
which include running and stuffy nose, sinusitis, sore throat,
cold head, fever, and burning or red eyes, and (2) lower
respiratory symptoms (LRS), which include wheezing, wet
cough, dry cough, phlegm, shortness of breath, and chest
discomfort or pain. Most of the respiratory diseases underlying these symptoms are caused by bacterial, fungal, or viral
infections or by structural or functional damage to the
respiratory system. Very often the symptoms of a respiratory
disease are aggravated following exposure to air pollutant.
Children represent the largest subgroup of the population
susceptible to the adverse health effects of urban air pollution


-----

96 Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102


(Dockery et al. 2005). Urban air pollutants cause a wide
range of acute and chronic effects in the respiratory system
of children. Approximately 4 million deaths globally were
attributed to respiratory infections between 1997 and 1999
(World Health Organization 2000). Damage to the respiratory system in children can be devastating and permanent,
and the adverse effects of air pollution may be obvious in
adult life owing to long latent periods for several chronic
diseases, including cancer.
Given this background, it seemed important to assess the
respiratory health of children in Delhi where the level of air
pollution is still much above the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS) despite the introduction of compressed
natural gas as fuel for public transport vehicles. Air pollution
is viewed as a serious problem in Delhi. The Indian capital has
the dubious distinction of being one of the most polluted cities
in the world. In 2005, Delhi had an annual average
concentration of RSPM, i.e., PM 10, of 163.4 μg/m [3], which
was 2.7-fold higher the Indian standards for residential areas
(60 μg/m [3] ). The major sources of the city’s air pollution are
road traffic (72%), industrial emissions (20%), and emissions
from household activities (8%) (Ministry of Environment
and Forest, Government of India 2007). Soil resuspension is
also an important source of air pollution in the city
(Balachandran et al. 2000). Accordingly, the study reported
here was undertaken to examine the respiratory health of
children in Delhi with the sponsorship of the Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), Delhi.

Methods

Subjects

The study was conducted in different areas of Delhi, West
Bengal, and Uttaranchal. The sample areas were divided
into different homogeneous strata based on air pollution
level. Sampling was then carried out following a stratified
random sampling procedure under the general guidelines of
the simple random sampling without replacement method
(Rao 1989). A total of 16,164 children aged between 6 and
17 years participated in this study.

Urban children

Among the participants, 11,628 school-going children were
enrolled from 36 schools located in different parts of Delhi.
The schools were selected on the basis of the following
considerations:

& located within a 3-km radius of the air quality monitoring
stations of the CPCB and National Environmental

Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), so that health
data of the children could be analyzed based on air quality.


& represented a cross-section of the residents with
comparable representations of children from low,
medium, and high socio-economic status (SES).

Rural children (control)

A total of 4,536 children from 17 schools located in the
rural areas of Uttaranchal and West Bengal, where the level
of ambient air pollution is much lower due to the absence
of air-polluting industries and fewer motor vehicles, were
enrolled in this study as control subjects. To facilitate a
comparison of the urban (Delhi) and control children with
respect to fuel use at home, children from homes using
liquefied petroleum gas were preferred for enrollment.

Questionnaire survey on respiratory symptoms

The prevalence of respiratory symptoms was determined using
a structured respiratory symptomlogy questionnaire based on
the questionnaire developed by the British Medical Research
Council (BMRC) (Cotes 1987), the American Thoracic
Society (ATS) and the National Heart and Lung Institute
(NHLI) Division of Lung Diseases (DLD) questionnaire
(ATS-DLD-78-C; Ferris 1978), and the International Union
Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (IUATLD) bronchial
symptoms questionnaire (1984) (Burney et al. 1989). The
questions mainly addressed respiratory symptoms, such as
attacks of shortness of breath, wheezing, dry or wet cough,
and chest tightness. The questions were generally formulated
to elicit information covering the 12-month period preceding
completion of the questionnaire. It also included extended
items on asthma, asthma-like symptoms, and allergies. After
consent had been obtained from the school principal, the
respiratory health questionnaires were distributed among the
school children. Completed questionnaire forms signed by
the parent or guardian and countersigned by the class teacher
were collected from the respective schools.

Air quality data

Air quality data on PM 10 and oxides of sulphur and nitrogen
(SO x and NO x ) in the ambient air of the study areas were
collected from fixed-site monitoring stations of the Central
and State Pollution Control Boards . The level of PM 10 in the
indoor air of the households of the participating children was
also measured, using portable, battery-operated laser photometers (DustTrakTM Aerosol monitor, model 8520; TSI,
Minneapolis, MN).

Statistical analysis

The collected data were processed and analyzed in the EPI
info ver. 6.0 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,


-----

Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102 97


Atlanta, GA) and SPSS software packages (SPSS, Chicago,
IL). The chi-square test was performed on dichotomous or
multinomial qualitative variables, and the Student’s t test was
used for quantitative variables with a normal distribution and
homogeneous variances. A descendant stepwise logistic
regression adjusted over potential confounding variables
was carried out for the multivariate analysis.

Ethical clearance

The Institutional Ethics Committee of Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute (CNCI), Kolkata approved the study protocol.

Results

Study population

Among the 11,628 school-going children in Delhi who
participated in this study, 7,757 were boys and 3,871 were
girls. Among the 4,536 children who comprised the control
group, 2,950 were boys and 1,586 were girls. The age of
the children varied between 6 and 17 years, with the
majority of these children (approx. 55%) in both the urban

–
and rural groups being 12 14 years of age.

Demographic characteristics

The characteristics of both groups of children are presented in
Table 1. Based on these data, the children of Delhi (case) and
those of the rural areas of Uttaranchal and West Bengal
(control) were comparable (p>0.05, non-significant) with
respect to age, gender, body mass index (BMI), exposure to


parental smoking, religion, and eating habits. However, the
level of education attained by the parents and the family
income were lower for children in the control group than for
those in Delhi (p<0.05).

Air pollution level

Comparison of the air quality of Delhi with that of the control
areas revealed significantly higher levels of all pollutants
tested in the former. Although the SPM and RSPM levels
exceeded the national standards in both the control areas and

in Delhi, the latter had twofold higher levels of these
pollutants. The annual average concentration (± standard
deviation) of PM 10 in Delhi was 161.3±4.9 μg/m [3], which is
significantly higher than the 74.6±3.3 μg/m [3] measured in
the control areas. The mean concentrations of sulfur dioxide

(SO 2 ) and nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) in the urban air during this
same period were 9.6±1.0 and 50.1±7.1 μg/m [3], respectively,
which were within the permissible limit. In the control areas,
the concentrations of these two pollutants were 5.6±2.2 and
30.3±5.2 μg/m [3], respectively. The annual average concentrations of PM 2.5 and PM 1 in Delhi were 53.6±4.2 and
44.7±3.6 μg/m [3] ; in the control areas, these were 34.6±6.8
and 25.7 ±5.5 μg/m [3] respectively (Table 2).

Prevalence of respiratory symptoms

The prevalence of respiratory symptoms was recorded by
means of the questionnaire survey and personal interview. We
found that one or more respiratory symptoms were present in
the preceding 3-month period in nearly one-third (32.1%) of
children in Delhi. In contrast, 18.2% of the rural children had
experienced respiratory symptoms during the same period


Table 1 Demographic characteristics of the children

NS, Statistically non-significant;
BMI, body mass index

Where applicable, the data are
given as the mean ± standard
deviation (SD)


Characteristics Control (n=45,36 ) Delhi (n=11,628) p value

Median age (years) 14.2 14.0 NS

Boy:girl 1.86 2.0 NS

Mean height (cm) 149.5±10.5 151.5±11.3 NS

Mean body weight (kg) 37.0±10.3 42.5±12.9 NS
Mean BMI (kg/m [2] ) 16.4±3.6 18.1±3.4 NS

Parental smoking (%) 27.0 25.0 NS

Educational level of parents (%)

Up to 5 years of schooling 10.1 8.8 <0.05

10 years of schooling 37.0 31.0 <0.05

Graduate 48.7 53.4 <0.05

Postgraduate 3.6 6.2 <0.05

Professional 0.5 0.6 NS

Eating habits (%)

Vegetarian 5.7 7.4 NS

Mixed 94.3 92.6 NS

Average family income/month (Rupees) 4400 9500 <0.05


-----

98 Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102


250

200

150

100

50

0


Table 2 Comparison of air quality of the residential areas of Delhi
and the control areas

Pollutant Control areas Delhi

SPM 167.6±28.3 341.8±38.3*

PM 10 74.6±3.3 161.3 ±4.9*

PM 2.5 34.6±6.8 53.6±4.2*

PM 1 25.7 ±5.5 44.7±3.6*

NO 2 30.3±5.2 50.1±7.1*

SO 2 5.6±2.2 9.6±1.0*

*Significant difference at p < 0.05

Values are given in micrograms per cubic meter (μg/m [3] )

SPM, Suspended particulate matter; PM 10, 2.5, 1 [, PM with an]
aerodynamic diameter <10 μm, <2.5 μm, and <1 μm, respectively;
NO 2, nitrogen dioxide; SO 2, sulpher dioxide

(Table 3). The respiratory symptoms were more prevalent in
girls than in boys in both the rural and urban settings. The
girl:boy ratio with respect to symptom prevalence was 1.21
in Delhi and 1.3 in the rural areas. The children in Delhi

exhibited a greater prevalence of both URS (23.1 vs. 14.6%)
and LRS (17.0 vs. 8.0%) than the controls. The prevalence
of the respiratory symptoms complex (RSC) varied in
different parts of the city, being maximum in the residents
of Central Delhi, where the level of particulate pollution was
also high. The concentration of PM 10 was least in South
Delhi, and this was reflected in the prevalence of RSC in the
residents of this part of the city, namely, the prevalence of
RSC was the lowest here. Respiratory symptoms, both URS
and LRS, were more prevalent during the winter, followed
by the summer and monsoon, corresponding to the concentration of PM, the concentration of which was the highest
during the winter and lowest during the monsoon (Fig. 1).

Prevalence of individual URS

The prevalence of five URS, namely, sinusitis, rhinitis
(running or stuffy nose), sneezing, sore throat, and common
cold with fever, were the most prevalent URS reported in this


45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


|Col1|RSC URS LRS PM10|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||


Winter Summer Monsoon

Fig. 1 Seasonal variation in the prevalenceof respiratory symptoms.
RSC Respiratory symptoms complex, URS upper respiratory symptoms, LRS lower respiratory symptoms, PM 10 particulate matter with
an aerodynamic diameter <10 μm

study. In general, 23.1 and 14.6% of the children in Delhi and
the rural areas, respectively, had experienced one or more of
these URS in the preceding 3 months. URS were more
prevalent in girls than in boys in Delhi (26.5 vs. 21.4%) and in
the control group (18.0 vs. 12.8%; p<0.05). The girl:boy ratio
of URS prevalence was 1.24 in Delhi and 1.40 in the control
group, implying that the prevalence of URS showed a female
predominance, especially in rural areas. Running or stuffy
nose is associated with rhinitis. Nearly 90% of rhinitis cases
in children is caused by hypersensitivity, i.e., allergic
reactions to a host of environmental allergens. This symptom
was present in 9.6% of the children of Delhi and in 5.8% of
the control children, which is a highly significant difference
(p<0.05). The children of Delhi had a 1.7-fold increased
prevalence of sneezing than control children, and the
difference was highly significant. Sore throat was reported
by 7.4% children of Delhi compared with 4.9% of the
control children. More than 10% of the children of Delhi

suffered from common cold and fever in the preceding
3 months compared with 5.2% in the control children.

Prevalence of individual LRS

The overall prevalence of LRS was significantly higher (p<
0.001) among children residing in Delhi than among their


Table 3 Prevalence (%) of respiratory symptoms in the 3-month period preceding completion of the questionnaire

Symptoms Control (n=4,536) Delhi (n=11,628)

Total Boys Girls Total Boys Girls
(n=4,536) (n=2,950) (n=1,586) (n=11,628) (n=7,757) (n=3,871)

Respiratory symptoms complex (RSC) 18.2 16.3 22.4 32.1* 30.0* 26.3*

Upper respiratory symptoms (URS) 14.6 12.8 18.0 23.1** 21.4** 26.5**

Lower respiratory symptoms (LRS) 8.0 7.7 8.5 17.0** 17.4** 16.4**

*p<0.05, **p <0.001 compared with control children according to the chi- square test

Values are given in percentage of respective population

Many children had more than one symptom


-----

Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102 99


rural counterparts (control). Among the former, boys had a
slightly greater prevalence of LRS than girls (17.4 vs.
16.4%), whereas the opposite was the case among the
control group [8.5 (girls) vs. 7.7% (boys)]. Dry cough was
present in 6.6% of the children of Delhi and 3.3% of the
control children. Children from north and central Delhi

suffered most from a dry cough, while the prevalence was
lowest in south Delhi. Cough with phlegm (sputum
production) or wet cough was present in 7.0% of the
children of Delhi; in contrast, only 3.8% of the children in
the control group had this symptom (p<0.001). Children
from north, west, and central Delhi suffered more from a
cough with phlegm than did children from east and south
Delhi. This symptom was significantly more prevalent
during the winter than during the summer and monsoon [
winter vs. summer: odds ratio (OR) 1.98, 95% confidence

–
interval (CI) 1.34 2.71; winter vs. monsoon: OR 2.23, 95%
CI 1.55–2.95). Wheeze, i.e., a whistling sound during
breathing, was present in 4.8% of the children of Delhi and
in 2.7% of the control children. Thus, Delhi’s children had
a 1.8-fold higher prevalence of wheeze than the controls
(difference was highly significant at p<0.05). Pain or
tightness of the chest was present in 3.3% of the boys and
3% of the girls of Delhi in the preceding 3 months, with an
overall prevalence of 3.2%. In contrast, 1.2 % of the control
children (1% of boys and 1.6% of girls) had this symptom.
Out of breath or breathless on exertion was reported by
5.9% of the children of Delhi compared with 2.9% of the
control children (p<0.001). Disturbed sleep due to breathing problems was reported by 2.2% of the children of Delhi
and 0.7% of the rural children (p<0.001).

Weak positive association between PM 10 level in breathing
air and prevalence of URS

When the potential confounders, such as SES, parental
smoking, age, and gender, were controlled for in a
multivariate logistic regression analysis, only sore throat


–
(OR 1.25, 95% CI 1.03 1.52, p<0.05) and common cold

–
with fever (OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.12 1.65, p < 0.05) were
found to be positively associated with particulate pollution
(Table 4).

Strong positive association between PM 10 level in breathing
air and prevalence of LRS in children

Unlike URS, a strong, statistically significant positive
association was observed between PM 10 level in Delhi’s
air and the prevalence of six symptoms of LRS in children
in the preceding 3 months (Table 5). Using multivariate
logistic regression analysis after controlling for potential
confounders, such as parental smoking and SES, we found
that particulate pollution was positively associated with all
six symptoms of LRS. The strongest association was for
sleep disturbance due to breathing trouble and dry cough,
followed by chest pain or discomfort, breathlessness on
exertion, cough with sputum production, and wheeze. In
essence, the prevalence of LRS increases with increasing
concentrations of particulate pollution in the breathing air.
The sample areas were divided into different homogeneous strata based on air pollution level (in μg/m [3] : 50–75;
76–100; 101–125; 126–150; >150). Taking the prevalence
of individual symptoms at the low pollution level (PM 10 =
50–70 μg/m [3] ) as the constant (OR 1) in the conditional
regression analysis, the prevalence of LRS symptoms was
found to be doubled or tripled when the particulate
pollution level was elevated (PM 10 >125 μg/m [3] ; Table 6).

Discussion

Compared with age-and sex-matched rural controls, there
was a remarkably higher prevalence of URS and LRS
among the school-ages children of Delhi participating in
this study. The children from the control areas (rural areas
of West Bengal and Uttaranchal) were comparable with the


Table 4 Logistic regression analysis of the association between particulate air pollution (PM 10 ) and prevalence of URS after adjustment for
potential confounders

Symptom Control (n=4,536) Delhi (n=11,628) OR (95% CI)

Sinusitis 3.2 3.4 1.06 (0.87–1.34)

Running or stuffy nose 5.8 9.6 1.22 (0.95–.49)

Sore throat 4.9 7.4 1.25 (1.03–1.52)*

Sneezing 5.2 9.1 1.09 (0.86–1.22)

Common cold and fever 5.7 10.5 1.35 (1.12–1.65)*

Total URS 14.6 23.1 1.24 (1.02–1.47)*

*p<0.05

OR, Odds ratio, CI, confidence interval

The results are expressed as the percentage of affected children with the respective symptom


-----

100 Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102


Table 5 Logistic regression
analysis of association between
PM 10 and prevalence of LRS in
children

*p<0.05

The results are expressed as the
percentage of affected children
with the respective symptom


LRS Control Delhi OR (95% CI)

Dry cough 3.3 6.6 1.48 (1.24–1.67)*

Cough with phlegm 3.8 7.0 1.33 (1.12–1.56)*

Wheeze 2.7 4.8 1.23 (1.04–1.45)*

Breathlessness on exertion 2.9 5.9 1.37 (1.15–1.63)*

Chest discomfort 1.2 3.2 1.44 (1.18–1.76)*

Sleep disturbance due to breathing problem 0.7 2.2 1.68 (1.35–1.96)*

Total LRS 8.0 17.0 1.42 (1.19–1.83)*


children from the exposed area (Delhi) in all respects with
the exception of the level of RSPM (PM 10 ). These findings
could be linked to city’s high level of ambient air pollution
because a large number of studies have shown positive
associations between air pollution and respiratory symptoms (Romieu et al. 2002).
The prevalence of RSC varied in different parts of the
city, reaching a maximum among the residents of Central
Delhi where the level of particulate pollution was also high.
The concentration of PM 10 was least in South Delhi, and
this was reflected by the lowest prevalence of RSC among
the residents of this part of the city. Respiratory symptoms,
both URS and LRS, were more prevalent during the winter
followed by the summer and monsoon, which again
corresponds with the concentration of PM, which was
highest during the winter and lowest during the monsoon.
The prevalence of RSC varied with seasons, again showing
links to PM 10 level as the level of PM 10 was lowest during
the monsoon and highest during the winter. Another
important confounder was SES, with the lower the SES,
the higher the prevalence of RSC. Poverty and lower social
status are associated with a large family size, crowded
living conditions, poorer access to medical care, higher
smoking rates, nutritional deficits, and exposure to environmental pollutants, including urban air pollution and
stressful living environments. These factors may contribute
individually or perhaps interact among themselves to
increase the susceptibility to respiratory diseases. During
the statistical evaluation, the confounder, i.e, SES, was

taken into account and controlled for.


Upper and lower respiratory symptoms, which were found
in excess in children of Delhi, could be a fall-out of a greater
interaction of the airways with allergens and pathogens and/or
impairment in lung defense. A review of the literature on
possible associations between air pollution and respiratory
symptoms in children revealed that outdoor and indoor air
pollution are positively associated with upper and lower
respiratory tract infections in children (Chauhan et al. 2005).
Available evidence conclusively supports the association
between outdoor air pollution, including PM 10, PM 2.5, NO 2,
SO 2, and ozone, and increased upper and lower respiratory
symptoms in children. Many of these symptoms are related
to infections. Viral and bacterial infections can cause severe

pathological abnormalities in both the upper and lower
respiratory tract, with the extent of epithelial damage varying
with the pathogen type. In particular, the lower airway
epithelium between the bronchial and alveolar regions is
more susceptible than the nasal, laryngeal and tracheal
regions. It is possible that the penetration of pathogens into
the epithelium could be facilitated by both epithelial
shedding and reduced ciliary clearance, resulting in easier
access of the pathogen to antigen-presenting cells and,
consequently, leading to increased inflammation. Acute
respiratory infections (ARIs) are divided into two main
groups; upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) and lower
respiratory tract infections (LRTIs). The risk of severe ARIs
is greatest in very young children and in the elderly. The
World Health Organization (WHO) has defined URTIs as a
combination of symptoms that include one or more of the
following; cough with or without fever, blocked or running


Table 6 Conditional logistic regression analysis of the association between chronic exposure to PM 10 and lower respiratory symptoms

PM 10 concentration (μg/m [3] ) Dry cough Wet cough Wheeze Breathless-ness Chest discomfort Sleep disturbance

50-75 1 1 1 1 1 1

76-100 1.22 (1.04-1.47)* 1.06 (0.84–1.29) 0.97 (0.76–1.14) 1.12 (1.02–1.44)* 1.13 (1.02–1.34)* 1.26 (1.1–1.48)

101-125 1.86* (1.54–2.24) 1.29 (1.06–1.57)* 1.04 (0.72–1.38) 1.34 (1.14-1.83)* 1.66 (1.27–2.14)* 1.64 (1.25–2.13)

126-150 2.20 (1.81–2.68)* 1.30 (1.09–1.56)* 1.43 (1.12–1.77)* 1.51 (1.22–1.78)* 1.94 (1.53–2.44)* 1.78 (1.33–2.27)

>150 3.12 (2.36–3.75)* 3.03 (2.53–3.62)* 1.67 (1.19–2.36)* 2.84 (2.31–3.47)* 2.65 (2.09–3.37)* 2.73 (1.89–4.32)

*p<0.05

Results are presented as the OR with 95% CI in parenthesis


-----

Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102 101


nose, sore throat and ear discharge (World Health Organization 1997). URTIs are usually viral in origin and include the
common cold viruses, such as rhinoviruses and corona
viruses. In contrast, LRTIs involve infections of the lung and
are associated with symptoms like cough and dyspnea,
bronchitis, and pneumonia, which usually present in serious
forms. URTIs and LRTIs are not mutually exclusive; they
frequently coexist during the same episode of respiratory
infections. Bacteria and viruses cause infection in both the

upper and lower respiratory tracts, and upper respiratory
infections are often followed or accompanied by lower
respiratory infections (Chauhan et al. 2005).
There has been a series of studies investigating the link
between URTIs and air pollution. An increase in total
suspended particle and NO 2 levels of 10 and 70 μg/m [3],
respectively, was found to be associated with a 27 and 28%
increase in cases of laryngo-tracheo-bronchitis (Schwartz et
al. 1991). Traffic-related air pollution and the risk of
respiratory diseases in a cohort of 4,000 children were
investigated in the Netherlands, and a positive association
was observed between air pollution and URTIs. A study in
the UK investigated the association between the number of
general practitioner consultations for upper respiratory tract
diseases, excluding allergic rhinitis, and outdoor air pollu
–
tion. In children aged 0 14 years, a 3.5-fold increase in the
number of such consultations was observed for an increase
in SO 2 levels of between 13 and 31 μg/m [3] (Hajat et al. 1999,
2002). In another study in Taiwan, Hwang and Chan (2002)
observed a 0.3–1.3% increase in the number of consultations

with physicians with a 10% increase in the levels of NO 2,
SO 2, and PM 10 . In a cross-sectional study in ten different

–
areas of Switzerland in children aged 6 15 years, the risk of
bronchitis between the most and least polluted areas was
found to be significant with an OR of 2.17 for PM 10 (BraunFahrlander et al. 1997). It is therefore quite possible that air
pollution may modify symptoms in children who are already
infected.

Diesel exhaust particles have been identified as the major
contributing factor to allergy (Sydbom et al. 2001; Riedl and
Diaz-Sanchez 2005). In our study, allergic rhinitis (running
or stuffy nose), wheeze, cough, and dyspnea were present in
a substantial number of the children of Delhi. Allergic
rhinitis is one of the most common chronic diseases in

children (Meltzer 2006). It can significantly impact a child’s
health, as it impairs the quality of life, and it can predispose
to the development of co-morbidities, such as asthma
(Meltzer 2006). The poor air quality of Delhi may account
for these symptoms because a close relationship exists
between outdoor air pollution and sinusitis (Wolf 2002).
Exposure to fungal spores, such as those of Alternaria, could
also elicit these symptoms (Delfino et al. 2002). A European
study has shown that ambient particles (PM 10 ) from
combustion sources act as carriers of allergens (such as


pollen) that could elicit allergic reactions in the airways
following inhalation (Namork et al. 2006).
The combustion of automotive fuels produces a variety of
outdoor pollutants, such as NO 2, SO 2, and PM 10 . There is
increasing evidence to suggest that exposure to these
pollutants is positively associated with the genesis of several
respiratory diseases in children as particulate air pollutants
are able to penetrate the lower airways in children (Bunn et
al. 2001). In many epidemiological studies of outdoor NO 2
and PM 10 exposure, an association has been found between
adverse health effects and exposure to these pollutants, often
at levels well below the current WHO guidelines. Many of
these functions can be modulated by exposure to PM 10, NO 2,
and other air pollutants (Chauhan and Johnston 2003;
Chauhan et al. 2005).
Unlike the concentration of RSPM (PM 10 ), the levels of
SO x and NO x in the air of Delhi were within established
standards. Therefore, it seems possible that PM, rather than
SO x or NO x, was primarily responsible for the adverse
respiratory changes recorded in the children of Delhi in this
study. In agreement with this, epidemiological studies have
shown that particulate matter, but not SO 2, is associated with
increased prevalence of URS and LRS in urban children
(Aekplakorn et al. 2003) and adolescents (Pierse et al. 2006).
The World Bank has estimated that India spends about
5,500 crore rupees annually for the treatment of ailments
caused by air pollution, of which the health cost of air
pollution for Delhi alone was about 1,000 crore rupees (Mittal
et al. 2004).Thus, these findings are expected to serve as
reference data for future monitoring studies of urban air
pollution with respect to public health, in particular, that of
children. They will also serve as guidelines in monitoring
programs and for intervention policies aimed at bettering the
situation.

Acknowledgments I would like to thank the Central Pollution
Control Board (CPCB), Delhi, for providing the funding to carry out
the study. I would also like to thank all of the children, parents,
teachers, and school principals, without whose enthusiasm and
cooperation the study would have been impossible.

Reference

Aekplakorn W, Loomis D, Vichit-Vadakan N, Shy C, Plungchuchon S
(2003) Acute effects of SO 2 and particles from a power plant on
respiratory symptoms of children, Thailand. S East Asian J Trop
Med Public Health 34(4):906–914
Balachandran S, Meena BR, Khillare PS (2000) Particle size
distribution and its elemental composition in the ambient air of
Delhi. Environ Int 26(1–2):49–54
Braun-Fahrlander C, Vuille JC, Sennhauser FJ et al (1997) Respiratory
health and long-term exposure to air pollutants in Swiss school
children. SCARPOL team: Swiss study on childhood allergy and
respiratory symptoms with respect to air pollution, climate and
pollen. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 155(3):1042–1049


-----

102 Air Qual Atmos Health (2011) 4:95–102


Bunn HJ, Dinsdale D, Smith T, Grigg J (2001) Ultrafine particles in
alveolar macrophages from normal children. Thorax 56(12):932–934
Burney PG, Laities LA, Perdrizet S et al (1989) Validity and repeatability
of the IUATLD (1984) Bronchial Symptom Questionnaire: an
international comparison. Eur Respir J 2(10):940–945
Chauhan A, Johnston SL (2003) Air pollution and infection in
respiratory illness. Br Med Bull 68:95–112
Chauhan A, Chatterjee A, Johnston SL (2005). Acute respiratory
infections. In: Effects of air pollution on children’s health and
development: a review of the evidence. World Health Organization, Special Programme on Health and Environment. European
Center for Environment and Health, Bonn, pp 44–69
Cotes JE (1987) Medical Research Council Questionnaire on
Respiratory Symptoms. Lance 31(2):1028
Delfino RJ, Zeiger RS, Seltzer JM, Street DH, McLaren CE (2002)
Association of asthma symptoms with peak particulate air pollution
and effect modification by anti inflammatory medication use.
Environ Health Perspect 110(10):A607–617
Dockery DW, Pope CA, XU X III (1993) An association between air
pollution and mortality in six U.S. cities. N Eng J Med 329
(24):1753–1759
Dockery DW, Skerrett PJ, Walters D, Gilliland F (2005) Development
of lung function. In: Effects of air pollution on children’s health
and development: a review of the evidence. World Health
Organization Special Programme on Health and Environment.
European Centre for Environment and Health, Bonn, pp 108–133
Ferris BG (1978) Epidemiology standardization project. Am Rev
Respir Dis 118:1–88
Hajat S, Haines A, Goubet SA, Atkinson RW, Anderson HR (1999)
Association of air pollution with daily GP consultations for
asthma and other lower respiratory condition in London. Thorax
54:597–605

Hajat S, Anderson HR, Atkinson RW, Haines A (2002) Effects of air
pollution on general practitioners consultations for upper

–
respiratory diseases in London. Occu Environ Med 59(5):294
299

Hwang JS, Chan CC (2002) Effects of air pollution on daily clinic
visits for lower respiratory tract illness. Am J Epidemiol 155
(1):1–10
Meltzer EO (2006) Allergic rhinitis: managing the pediatric spectrum.
Allergy Asthma Proc 27(1):2–8


Mittal A, Arora A, Mandal A (2004) Vehicular pollution by
introduction of CNG in Delhi—a case study. (abstract) Clean
Air Initiative: Better Air Quality (BAQ), 2004
Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India (1997).
White Paper on Pollution in Delhi with an Action Plan. Ministry
of Environment and Forest, New Delhi
Namork E, Johansen BV, Lovik M (2006) Detection of allergens
adsorbed to ambient air particles collected in four European
cities. Toxicol Lett 165(1):71–78
Pierse N, Rushton L, Harris RS, Kuchni CE, Silverman M, Grigg J
(2006) Locally generated particulate pollution and respiratory
symptoms in young children. Thorax 61(3):216–220
Rao NSN (1989) Elements of health statistics. Tara Book Agency,
Varanasi,
Riedl M, Diaz-Sanchez D (2005) Biology of diesel exhaust effects on
respiratory function. J Allergy Clin Immunol 115(2):221–228
Romieu I, Samet JM, Smith KR, Bruce N (2002) Outdoor air
pollution and acute respiratory infections among children in
developing countries. J Occup Environ Med 44(7):640–649
Samet JM, Domonici F, Frank C, Curriero CI, Zeger SL (2000) Fine

–
particulate air pollution and mortality in 20 U.S. cities, 1987
1994. N Engl J Med 343(24):1742–1749
Schwartz J, Spix C, Wichmann HE, Malin E (1991) Air pollution and
acute respiratory illness in five German communities. Environ
Res 56(1):1–14
Sydbom A, Blomberg A, Parnia S, Stenfors N, Sandstorm T, Dahlen
SE (2001) Health effects of diesel exhaust emissions. Eur Respir
J 17(4):733–746
Ulrich MM, Alink GM, Kumarathasan P, Vincent R, Boere AJ, Cassee
FR (2002) Health effects and time course of particulate matter on
the cardiopulmonary system in rats with lung inflammation. J
Toxicol Environ Health A 65(20):1571–1595
Wolf C (2002) Urban air pollution and health: an ecological study of
chronic rhinosinusitis in Cologne, Germany. Health Place 8
(2):129–139
World Health Organization (1997) Integrated management of childhood illness (documents WHO/CHD 97.3 A-G). World Health
Organization, Geneva
World Health Organization (2000) The world health report 2000—health
systems: improving performance. World Health Organization,
Geneva


-----

