DO ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS DELIVER?

EVIDENCE FROM THE WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE

PROGRAM [∗]

M EREDITH F OWLIE

M ICHAEL G REENSTONE

C ATHERINE W OLFRAM

A growing number of policies and programs aim to increase investment in

energy efficiency, because conventional wisdom suggests that people fail to take

up these investments even though they have positive private returns and gener
ate environmental benefits. Many explanations for this energy efficiency gap have

been put forward, but there has been surprisingly little field testing of whether

the conventional wisdom is correct. This article reports on the results of an exper
imental evaluation of the nation’s largest residential energy efficiency program—

the Weatherization Assistance Program—conducted on a sample of approximately

30,000 households in Michigan. The findings suggest that the upfront investment

costs are about twice the actual energy savings. Furthermore, the model-projected

savings are more than three times the actual savings. Although this might be

attributed to the “rebound” effect—when demand for energy end uses increases

as a result of greater efficiency—the article fails to find evidence of significantly

higher indoor temperatures at weatherized homes. Even when accounting for the

broader societal benefits derived from emissions reductions, the costs still substan
tially outweigh the benefits; the average rate of return is approximately −7.8%

annually. *JEL Codes:* Q4, Q48, Q5.

∗ We received many helpful comments from seminar participants at Carnegie
Mellon, Columbia University, ETH Zurich, National University of Singapore,
NBER Summer Institute, Resources for the Future, the University of Basel, the
University of Maryland, the University of Michigan, and the University of Wisconsin. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, and
the UC Berkeley Energy and Climate Institute and institutional support from the
Poverty Action Lab (JPAL) at MIT, the Center for Local, State, and Urban Policy
(CLOSUP) at the University of Michigan, and the Energy Institute at Haas. We
thank James Gillan, Brian Goggin, Walter Graf, Erica Myers, Patrick Schwarz,
Daniel Stuart, and Matthew Woerman for excellent research assistance. We are
indebted to Jesse Worker for outstanding management of a challenging project.
Finally, we thank our contacts at our partner utility and the community action
agencies, without whom this project would not have been possible.

⃝ C The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
President and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
[journals.permissions@oup.com](mailto:journals.permissions@oup.com)
*The Quarterly Journal of Economics* (2018), 1597–1644. doi:10.1093/qje/qjy005.
Advance Access publication on January 29, 2018.

1597


-----

1598 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

I. I NTRODUCTION

Energy efficiency investments are widely believed to offer
a rare win-win opportunity. Detailed engineering projections,
such as those summarized by the well-known McKinsey curves
(McKinsey & Company 2009), routinely project that investments
pay for themselves through the energy saved alone (win 1). Moreover, by reducing the energy necessary to achieve a given level of
energy services (e.g., indoor heating), these investments promise
to decrease the greenhouse gas emissions causing climate change
and other pollutants that compromise human health (win 2).
Despite these apparent opportunities, there is a large and
persistent difference between the levels of investment in energy
efficiency that are projected to save consumers money and the
investments that individuals actually pursue. This has become
known as the “efficiency gap.” Over the past three decades, a wide
variety of explanations have been offered for this apparent failure
of consumers to avail themselves of profitable investment opportunities. The most popular explanations have emphasized the possibility of market failures, such as imperfect information, capital
market failures, split incentive problems, and behavioral explanations, including myopia, inattentiveness, and prospect theory and
reference-point phenomena (see, for example, Allcott and Greenstone 2012; Gillingham and Palmer 2014; Gerarden, Newell, and
Stavins 2015). In contrast, relatively little attention has been paid
to the more pedestrian possibility that the real-world returns on
energy efficiency investments are lower than the engineering models indicate. [1]

Mounting concern about climate change has increased the urgency of understanding this phenomenon. Governments around
the world are pursuing a wide range of policies designed to narrow
or close the energy efficiency gap. For example, the International
Energy Administration (IEA) has outlined a suite of policies that
do not harm economic growth and limit warming to the 2 [◦] C recommended by climate scientists; in this scenario, end-use energy
efficiency improvements account for 49% of the greenhouse gas
emissions abatement in 2020 (IEA 2013). [2] U.S. electric utilities

1. Early work by Joskow and Marron (1992) raised concerns about overstated
efficiency potential and underscored the importance of using ex post measures of
consumer behavior to estimate energy savings.
2. Indeed, energy efficiency is a central plank for virtually all serious climate
mitigation plans (Loftus et al. 2015).


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1599

are rapidly expanding their energy efficiency programs (Barbose
et al. 2013), and federal and state regulators routinely tighten
energy efficiency building codes, appliance standards, and fuel
economy standards for automobiles and trucks.
This article provides the first large-scale field evidence on
the returns to energy efficiency investments from a randomized controlled trial. Specifically, we use experimental and quasiexperimental variation in participation in the federal Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) to identify the returns to
these investments. WAP is the nation’s largest residential energy efficiency program and has provided more than 7 million
low-income households with weatherization assistance since its
inception in 1976. Recipient households in our study received approximately $5,150 worth of home improvements on average, with
zero out-of-pocket costs. The most common measures included furnace replacement, attic and wall insulation, and infiltration reduction. Importantly, WAP only pays for energy efficiency measures
that pass a cost-benefit test, based on ex ante engineering projections, with the aim of ensuring that only beneficial investments
are undertaken.
The randomized-encouragement design experiment was conducted on a sample of approximately 30,000 Michigan households
that were presumptively eligible for participation in WAP. Approximately one quarter of these households were randomly assigned
to a treatment group that was encouraged to apply for the program and received significant application assistance. The control
households were free to apply for WAP but were not contacted or
assisted in any way by our team.
There are three primary findings. First, an aggressive encouragement intervention increased WAP participation from less than
1% in the control group to about 6% in the encouraged group. The
encouragement was implemented by a firm with extensive experience managing outreach campaigns and neighborhood canvassing
operations, including among low-income populations. The field activities included almost 7,000 home visits, more than 32,000 phone
calls, and 2,700 follow-up appointments. Ultimately, these extensive efforts only managed to increase the participation rate by 5
percentage points at a cost of more than $1,000 per weatherized
household (Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram 2015), revealing low
demand in the eligible population for a program with considerable
potential benefits.
Second, the findings suggest that the benefits of these investments are substantially less than the upfront costs. We estimate


-----

1600 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

that the WAP energy efficiency investments reduce monthly energy consumption by 10–20% on average. Although this surely
provides a substantial assist to participating low-income households in the form of reduced energy bills, the upfront investment
costs are about twice the realized energy savings. Furthermore,
the ex post estimated savings are roughly 30% of the modelprojected savings. [3]

Third, while the modest energy savings might be attributed
to the “rebound” effect, when demand for energy end uses increases as a result of greater efficiency, the article fails to find
evidence of significantly higher indoor temperatures at weatherized homes. This finding comes from a novel survey of measured
indoor temperatures and thermostat set points that we conducted
in the study population. Across a variety of metrics, the WAP
energy efficiency investments appear to be poor performers on
average. Although these investments were free to participating
households, we can nevertheless estimate the private returns if
households had been responsible for the upfront costs, which is
the case for households that do not qualify for WAP. Counting private returns—a household’s reductions in energy bills and willingness to pay for any change in indoor temperatures—the annual
internal rate of return that would rationalize these efficiency investments is −2.3%. This finding of low, indeed negative, returns
suggests that at least for residential home retrofits, there may
not be much of an efficiency gap to explain. Rather, just like in
all other sectors of the economy, investments with low returns
are not taken up frequently. Importantly, the engineering model
used by WAP is similar, and in some cases identical, to those used
to develop recommended residential efficiency investments in the
broader population (i.e., not just low-income households).
In principle these investments could still be beneficial socially,
but on average, this is not the case with the measures we evaluate. In contrast to the private calculation, the social one accounts
for the benefits of reduced greenhouse gas and local pollutant
emissions and the fact that part of households’ energy savings
is a transfer from other energy consumers, rather than genuine

3. Allcott and Greenstone (2017) evaluate the returns to residential efficiency
investments in a different setting using a nonexperimental approach to measure
energy savings (although they exploit experimental variation in energy efficiency
audit take up). They find that the returns to investments are negative socially.
Measured natural gas savings amount to only 29% of the savings predicted by the
engineering model.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1601

social savings. When we account for these factors, the annual social internal rate of return that would justify these investments
is −7.8%. Finally, we also calculate the average cost per ton of
avoided CO 2 under a range of assumptions. The most plausible
estimates are $200/ton, which is significantly larger than the U.S.
government’s estimate of the social cost of carbon of roughly $38
(Greenstone, Kopits, and Wolverton 2013).
This article makes three primary contributions to the literature on energy efficiency. First and most important, it is one
of the first studies to provide causal evidence on the returns to
residential energy efficiency investments from a large-scale field
test. The closest paper methodologically is Dubin, Miedema, and
Chandran (1986), which reports results from an experiment conducted more than three decades ago on fewer than 400 households.
There have been a series of other important academic papers
that have taken on issues related to residential energy efficiency
using various sources of nonexperimental variation, including
Metcalf and Hassett (1999) on returns to insulation improvements; Davis, Fuchs, and Gertler (2014) about appliance replacement programs in Mexico; Jacobsen and Kotchen (2013), Kotchen
(2017), and Levinson (2016) on the energy savings associated
with building code standards; and Allcott and Greenstone (2017),
who use experimental and nonexperimental variation to estimate the welfare consequences of residential energy efficiency
programs that are not means tested. There is also a large (measured in the many hundreds) “gray” literature that is often commissioned by agents with a stake in the outcome (e.g., utilities that
could face regulatory sanctions if their energy efficiency programs
fail to deliver promised savings). These studies generally do not
meet modern standards of evidence, often relying on simulations,
rather than real-world data, failing to specify clear counterfactuals/control groups, or not reporting standard statistical tests. [4]

4. A survey by the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy revealed
that in 81% of U.S. states with significant energy efficiency activities, regulators
use ex ante engineering estimates to measure the savings from the programs
(Kushler, Nowak, and Witte 2012). Reports that do endeavor to develop ex post
estimates of savings vary in terms of analytical rigor, rarely meeting standards
applied in refereed journals (e.g., key details necessary to follow the approach to
evaluation are often missing). Furthermore, many do not use modern approaches
to statistical inference; it is not uncommon, for example, for these studies to simply
report differences without an accompanying statistical test of significance. See, for
example, CPUC (2015) for a summary of gray literature evaluations of California
efficiency programs implemented from 2010 to 2012.


-----

1602 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

Second, this article is the first effort to directly measure the
rebound effect and develop a framework or method that allows
for rebound behavior to count as a benefit or part of the returns to efficiency investments. The previous literature has generally had to rely on methods of detecting rebound that place
great faith in the validity of the engineering predictions of savings. For example, Dubin, Miedema, and Chandran (1986) assume that the engineering estimates are correct and use them
to model demand for energy services. Because they find elastic
demand for energy services, the paper concludes that there is a
rebound effect. Though the existence of the rebound effect has
been the subject of much debate (Gillingham et al. 2013), our
study is the first to provide a direct field test of this phenomenon
across a broad spectrum of residential energy efficiency investments.
Third, the article provides a demanding and credible test of
the validity of engineering models’ predictions about the returns
to residential energy efficiency investments. This test is important because the case for the energy efficiency gap—the motivation for almost all energy efficiency policy—is derived from the
promise of abnormally high returns to these investments; yet the
promises are derived from engineering models that have largely
been untested in the field. Furthermore, the article’s comparison of actual and modeled savings is conducted among the most
frequent residential efficiency investments. Finally, WAP’s engineering model is used extensively in other contexts, and there is
considerable similarity between its underlying assumptions that
generate ex ante predictions in the returns to efficiency investments and the assumptions in competing engineering models.
Thus, it seems that the pedestrian explanation for the energy
efficiency gap (that low take-up is due to low returns) deserves
greater consideration.
The article proceeds as follows. Section II introduces a conceptual framework useful for deriving the private value of energy
efficiency investments, including any behavioral adjustments they
may cause. Section III outlines key details on the WAP and describes our study design. Section IV describes the data sources
and provides summary statistics. Section V reports the main results on actual savings and on observed rebound effects. Section
VI develops measures of both the private and social returns to
energy efficiency investments and discusses the results’ external
validity to other settings. Section VII concludes.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1603

II. C ONCEPTUAL F RAMEWORK FOR M EASURING P RIVATE R ETURNS

Private gains from an investment in energy efficiency are
realized through two main channels: reduced energy consumption and increased consumption of energy services (e.g., lighting,
space heating, air conditioning) due to reductions in the price
of energy services. With respect to the first channel, any reduction in dollars spent on energy can be allocated to other forms of
welfare-enhancing consumption. The second channel becomes important when an efficiency-induced reduction in energy end-use
costs leads to an increase or “rebound” in the demand for the energy service. For utility-maximizing agents, any reoptimization of
consumption that occurs in response to an efficiency improvement
will be (weakly) welfare improving.
These basic ideas are illustrated in the upper quadrant of
Figure I, which plots consumption of a particular energy service, home heating, on the horizontal axis and consumption of
the numeraire (i.e., all other goods), *X*, on the vertical axis. This
framework focuses on home heating because it is a particularly
important end use in our empirical setting; over 90% of projected
energy savings from the weatherization investments we analyze
are heating related.
The two downward-sloping lines in the upper quadrant of the
figure reflect budget constraints, the lower before the efficiency
improvement (i.e., the status quo) and the higher after weatherization. The budget constraint pivots postweatherization because
the price of heating services (e.g., the price of keeping the house
at a certain indoor temperature in winter) has fallen; energy efficiency improvements reduce the cost of purchasing any given
level of thermal comfort.
The figure also illustrates a family of indifference curves for
a representative consumer, each of which trace out the bundles of
the numeraire, *X*, and heating services, *H*, that deliver the same
level of utility. The U-shape of the indifference curves reflects
that households do not like to be too hot or too cold. In the status
quo (i.e., absent an efficiency improvement), the representative
agent will maximize utility through the choice of *H* 0 and *X* 0 . The
weatherization-induced expansion of the budget constraint allows
the agent to move to a higher level of utility associated with the
bundle of *H* 1 and *X* 1 . In the figure, status quo consumption occurs below the satiation point for thermal comfort. Thus, when
the price falls, demand for heating services increases by *H* 1 − *H* 0 .


-----

1604 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

F IGURE I

Effect of Encouragement on Participation and Energy Consumption

Budget constraints and indifference curves of a representative consumer are
plotted in the top quadrant. A linear relationship between heating services and
building energy consumption (over a range where heating demand is strictly positive, and heating technology constraints do not bind) is plotted in the bottom
quadrant. See text for details.

The positive income effect also increases consumption of the numeraire by *X* 1 − *X* 0 .
The article’s empirical challenge is to measure the welfare
gains conferred by weatherization investments. Our empirical setting allows us to develop a measure of willingness to pay (WTP) for
weatherization that accounts for both reductions in energy expenditures, and increased consumption of heating services. The effect
of energy efficiency improvements on other consumption can be
measured using data on monthly energy expenditures which vary
one-for-one with the consumption of the numeraire. Put another
way, a $1 decrease in energy expenditures allows for a $1 increase
in consumption of all other goods. Measuring willingness to pay


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1605

for the increase in heating services (i.e., the direct rebound effect)
is more challenging because demand for energy services, such as
heating, is not readily observable in household energy consumption or expenditure data.
To obtain an estimate of the efficiency-induced increase in demand for heating ( *H* 1 − *H* 0 in the figure), we conduct a survey of
indoor temperatures in weatherized and nonweatherized homes.
With this estimate of the treatment-induced change in indoor
temperatures in hand, we can construct bounds for the welfare
consequences of any observed increase in warmth by imposing
some structure on the relationship between energy demand and
heating services. [5] The bottom quadrant of Figure I plots a representative building-specific relationship between heating services
and the energy required to achieve that temperature, *E*, holding constant outdoor temperatures and building characteristics,
*Z* . [6] Efficiency improvements to the building envelope (e.g., insulation improvements, window sealing, a furnace upgrade) reduce
the energy required to deliver any given level of heating services.
This implies that the slope of the relationship between heating
services and energy consumption becomes less steep following an
efficiency improvement, depicted as the pivot in the function that
determines energy consumption from *E* ( *H* ; *SQ*, *Z* ) to *E* ( *H* ; *W*, *Z* )
in the figure. Section V.C details our approach to empirically estimating the relationship between energy consumption and heating
demand, which in practice is measured as indoor temperature.
We use the empirical relationship between indoor temperatures and energy consumption to construct bounds on the utility

5. Our measure of the returns to weatherization investments is predicated on
a measure of increased indoor temperature, but we do not account for any increase
in comfort conditional on indoor air temperature. Researchers have noted that
improvements in insulation enhance comfort by reducing drafts and increasing
humidity (Schwarz and Taylor 1995). If a home is less drafty and more humid, a
consumer may be able to achieve the same comfort at a lower indoor temperature.
Consequently, what we measure here is the net effect of efficiency improvements
on heating demand. We return to this point later.
6. We assume a linear relationship between air temperature and energy demand over the relevant range of temperatures; we provide empirical support for
this assumption in Section V. Also, for ease of exposition, this figure depicts the
limited range of indoor air temperatures over which energy consumption is increasing in indoor temperatures. This range is bounded from below by the outdoor
air temperature (if the thermostat is set below the outdoor air temperature, no
heating services are required). The lines stop where the capacity of the home
heating system binds. Beyond this point, increased energy consumption ceases to
generate heating services.


-----

1606 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

gains from any efficiency-induced increase in the demand for indoor temperature using revealed-preference logic. Since the agent
chooses to increase heating services from *H* 0 to *H* 1 following the
efficiency improvement, it follows that a lower bound for the associated increased utility is the increase in heating costs incurred after weatherization. This value is represented by *P* *E* *( *E* 1, *W* − *E* 0, *W* ),
where *P* *E* is the exogenous price of energy. Note that the agent
chose less heating than *H* 1 prior to the efficiency improvement.
Thus, the cost of the change in heating services prior to weatherization, measured by *P* *E* *( *E* 1, *SQ* − *E* 0, *SQ* ), provides an upper
bound on the welfare gain. Preferences revealed prior to the efficiency improvement suggest that the agent values the increase in
heating services less than this incremental cost.
With this conceptual framework as a guide, the article estimates the causal effect of WAP participation on annual energy
consumption and WTP for changes in heating services.

III. B ACKGROUND AND S TUDY D ESIGN

*III.A. WAP*

The WAP is the nation’s largest residential energy-efficiency
program. WAP supports improvements in the energy efficiency of
dwellings occupied by low-income families. Since its inception in
1976, over 7 million low-income households have received weatherization assistance through the program. The American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act PL111-5 (ARRA) dramatically increased
the scale and scope of WAP. [7] Our analysis seeks to estimate the
impacts of weatherization assistance over the ARRA-funded time
period.
WAP funds are distributed to states based on a formula tied
to a state’s climate, the number of low-income residents, and their
typical energy bills. The states distribute WAP money to over
1,000 local subgrantees, which are typically community action
agencies (CAAs) or similar nonprofit groups. These subgrantees
are then tasked with identifying and serving eligible households.
The average participating household in our data received an average of $4,130 of energy efficiency investments and over $1,000

7. Funding increased from $450 million annually in 2009 to almost $5 billion
for the 2011–2012 program years. Under the ARRA-funded program, all owneroccupied households at or below 200% of the poverty line were eligible to apply for
assistance.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1607

worth of additional house improvements at zero out-of-pocket
costs. [8]

Before implementing a weatherization retrofit, CAA program
staff conduct an energy audit of the home. The purpose of the
audit is to recommend specific efficiency improvements. During
the visit, program auditors collect detailed information about the
building structure, heating and cooling systems, appliances, insulation, ventilation, and so on. This information is combined
with local climate conditions and retrofit measure costs, then fed
into a computer-based audit tool: the National Energy Audit Tool
(NEAT). This tool is composed of a set of easy-to-use but advanced
energy audit computer programs that identify the cost-effective
energy-efficiency retrofit measures for a home after taking into account local weather conditions, retrofit measure costs, fuel costs,
and specific construction details of the home. NEAT was designed
specifically to help states and local weatherization agencies implement WAP, although it is also a widely used tool for private-sector
weatherization audits (EERE 2010). [9]

NEAT produces an estimate of the energy savings and costs
associated with different combinations of efficiency measures. The
present value of projected energy savings are calculated using a
discount rate of 3% and an engineering estimate of the life span
of the measures. The 3% discount rate is consistent with Office
of Management and Budget guidance on how to evaluate benefits
of federal spending but is substantially lower than the cost of
borrowing for most households, especially low-income ones. The
WAP program requires that all recommended measures return a
minimum of $1.00 in incremental savings for every $1.00 spent in
labor and material costs.
The process of applying for weatherization is highly onerous
and time intensive, at least partially to prevent fraud. Applicants
must submit extensive paperwork documenting their eligibility,
including utility bills, earnings documentation, Social Security
cards for all residents of the home, and deeds to the home. Local

8. During the course of the retrofit, additional costs are incurred to ensure
the safe and effective installation of the weatherization measures. For example,
electric wiring updates or asbestos removal may be required to ensure a safe
working environment. Once these safety measures are accounted for, the average
cost per household is $5,155.
9. The NEAT audit tool is documented extensively at [http://](http://weatherization.ornl.gov/assistant.shtml)
[weatherization.ornl.gov/assistant.shtml.](http://weatherization.ornl.gov/assistant.shtml)


-----

1608 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

agencies often identify potential applicants from the pool of households that are receiving other social services, although walk-in
clients are routinely admitted. Agencies screen potential applicants for eligibility. Eligible applicants are then prioritized following guidelines that recommend CAAs assign the household a
high rank if it has an elderly resident, a person with disabilities,
or children, or where the occupants typically face a high energy
burden (energy as a share of income) or have high residential energy use (see 10 CFR 440.16(b) (1–5)). [10] Given the nonrandom
nature of the process by which households end up in the program, any comparisons of energy consumption across weatherized
and unweatherized households risks confounding the effect of the
program with preexisting differences in determinants of energy
consumption.

*III.B. Research Design*

Our analysis focuses on a sample of low-income Michigan
households. Michigan is one of the largest recipients of WAP program funding on account of its cold winters and large low-income
population. Furthermore, we were able to secure collaborative
agreements with a major Michigan utility and five CAAs working
in this utility’s service territory. This allowed us access to detailed,
household-level energy consumption and weatherization program
data. A close collaboration with two of these agencies allowed us
to implement a large-scale field experiment.
Michigan received over $200 million in ARRA funding for
weatherization assistance. A series of bureaucratic delays—for
example, ensuring that contractors were paid prevailing wages—
delayed spending until early 2011 (Radnofsky 2010). Around
March 2011, weatherization activities in Michigan increased
markedly. All stimulus funds had to be spent by March 2012.
After that point, the pace of weatherization activity dropped precipitously. We stopped collecting data in April 2014. A number of
households that applied for WAP had not yet received services by
the end of our study period.
The article’s empirical challenge is to obtain causal estimates
of the effect of participation in the WAP program on energy consumption and indoor heating demand. We estimate versions of the

10. Given the high ARRA funding levels during our study period, the prioritization scheme was less binding compared with lower funding periods.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1609

following equation:

(1) *ln* ( *y* *imt* ) = *β* **1** { *W AP* } *imt* + *α* *im* + *α* *mt* + *ϵ* *imt* *,*

where *ln* ( *y* *imt* ) measures the natural log of energy consumption (natural gas, electricity, or a combined MMBtu measure) at
household *i* in month *m* and year *t* . The equation also includes
household-by-month-of-year fixed effects, *α* *im*, to account for permanent differences in a household’s energy consumption across
months. It is possible to include such a rich set of fixed effects
because we observe households across multiple years. The model
also includes month-by-year fixed effects, *α* *mt*, to adjust for the
average effects of time-varying factors (e.g., winter temperature)
that generate variation in average consumption across all households. [11]

The parameter of interest is *β*, which measures the mean
difference in energy consumption subsequent to the completion of
WAP energy efficiency investments, after adjustment for the fixed
effects. It is a difference-in-differences estimator that compares
the change in energy consumption after weatherization to before,
relative to consumption among households that have either not
yet weatherized through WAP or never did during our sample
period. We take two approaches to developing unbiased estimates
of *β*, described in the next two subsections.

*1. Randomized Encouragement Design.* The article’s primary empirical estimates are derived from an experimental research design. The basis of the experiment is a randomly assigned
encouragement intervention that aims to increase the probability of treatment households’ participation in WAP through recruitment and significant application assistance. This randomized
encouragement design is particularly useful in contexts such as
this one where program participation cannot be directly denied—
we cannot prohibit eligible households from participating in this
federal program.
The recruitment and assistance was conducted by FieldWorks, a private company that specializes in running neighborhood canvassing operations and managing outreach campaigns.
We chose them because they had substantial experience working

11. We also estimate specifications that include month-by-year-by-county and
month-by-year-by-billing segment fixed effects.


-----

1610 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

TABLE I

R ANDOMIZED E NCOURAGEMENT I NTERVENTION

Encouraged group (households) 8,648
Initial home visits 6,694
Robo-calls 23,500
Personal calls 9,171
Follow-up appointments 2,720
Average cost/encouraged hh $55.00

*Notes.* The table summarizes efforts to encourage a group of Michigan households to take up weatherization
assistance. These households were selected randomly from a subpopulation of households who were located
in the service territory of our partner utility and presumptively eligible based on ex ante available income
information.

with low-income populations, and their staff had generated millions of phone calls and knocked on millions of doors in previous
engagements.
The experimental sample comprised 34,161 households that
were both presumptively eligible for WAP and located within the
counties served by the two CAAs that partnered with us for the
field experiment. Approximately one quarter of the sample households were randomly assigned to our encouragement treatment.
For the remaining households assigned to the control group, we
simply observe energy consumption and program participation
decisions.
The encouragement campaign got under way as ARRA funds
began flowing to the implementing agencies. Encouragement activities ran from March to May 2011. Table I summarizes our
encouragement and enrollment activities in detail. During the
encouragement phase, field staff made almost 7,000 initial inperson house visits. [12] The ground operations were complemented
with 23,500 targeted robo-calls to raise awareness of the weatherization program and our encouragement campaign.
After the encouragement phase, we transitioned to an enrollment phase, which lasted through February 2012. Our staff made
over 9,000 personal phone calls to provide assistance with the
onerous application process and to coordinate in-person meetings.
Over the course of 2,720 home visits, field staff helped individuals
assemble documentation and complete paperwork. In some cases,
field staff provided transportation to and from the program agency
offices.

12. Most (but not all) houses assigned to the treated group were contacted. A
small fraction were deemed inaccessible (e.g., because of a locked gate).


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1611

The final row of Table I reports that we spent around $475,000
on the encouragement or a little more than $55 per household in
the treatment group. It is noteworthy that we did not initially intend to devote such extensive efforts and resources to the encourage and enrollment phases. However, the early results suggested
that we were failing to have a substantial impact on applications,
and concerns about the ultimate precision of our estimated treatment effects motivated us to raise additional funds to expand the
share of treated households. [13]

We use the random assignment to encouragement as an instrumental variable for weatherization status. In a first stage, we
use OLS to estimate:

(2) **1** { *W AP* } *imt* = *θ* **1** { *Encouraged* } *imt* + *δ* *im* + *δ* *mt* + *η* *imt* *,*

where the dependent variable is an indicator variable that
switches from 0 to 1 in the month after a household’s weatherization retrofit is complete. The indicator variable, **1** { *Encouraged* } *imt*
is set to 0 for all households prior to the encouragement intervention. After March 2011, this indicator switches to 1 for the 25%
of the households randomly assigned to the treatment group.
We substitute **1** { *W AP* [�] } *imt* from the estimation of equation (2)
to fit equation (1) and obtain *β* [ˆ] *IV* . In this instrumental variables
(IV) framework, *β* [ˆ] *IV* is identified using the exogenous variation in
program participation that is generated via the random assignment of encouragement.

*2. Quasi-experimental Design.* The quasi-experimental research design uses data collected from households that applied
for WAP after March 2011 with one of the five CAAs that shared
data with us to estimate a version of equation (1). In this sample of
households, we compare patterns in energy consumption among
weatherized households and households that applied for WAP but
had not been weatherized by mid-2014, when our data ends. Forty

13. On the one hand, our encouragement costs may have been higher than
necessary. To our knowledge, ours was the first encouragement program for WAP,
and we learned from our initial experiences how to refine our intervention. On the
other hand, the costs in Table I do not reflect the time the research team devoted to
overseeing the encouragement effort. Online Appendix 1 and Fowlie, Greenstone,
and Wolfram (2015) provide more details on the encouragement and application
assistance programs.


-----

1612 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

percent of applicants in our data were weatherized through WAP
during this period.
A critical issue for the validity of the quasi-experimental estimates is how households in this sample were chosen for weatherization. The road from application to energy efficiency investments is long and there are many potential off-ramps. Applicant
households may fail to complete the necessary—and involved—
paperwork or may be deemed ineligible based on the information
they provide. Once paperwork is completed successfully, households are put on a list, and the waiting times can exceed one year.
Once at the top of the list, homeowners must schedule an energy
audit. Households may fail to receive weatherization if they miss
an audit appointment, or if the auditors discover risks to WAP
contractors (e.g., asbestos in the home). Because of significant delays in ramping up weatherization activities under ARRA, agencies were unable to complete the weatherizations they anticipated
prior to the March 2012 ARRA deadline, which helps explain why
fewer than half of the applicants in our sample were weatherized
by mid-2014. Some of the explanations for variation in treatment
status among applicants are orthogonal to household characteristics that determine energy consumption patterns, whereas others
clearly are not.
The primary threat to consistent estimation of *β* using the
quasi-experimental approach is the possibility that time-varying
factors that affect household demand for energy, also influence
WAP participation. For instance, households may push forward
their WAP application more aggressively when they anticipate
an increase in their demand for energy, as would be the case
when the number of people in their household increases or they
lose a job and expect to spend more time at home. Although the
quasi-experimental approach does not have a direct solution to
this threat to identification, we take steps to balance observable
characteristics and trends across weatherized and unweatherized households. To evaluate the robustness of our findings, we
reestimate equation (1) using alternative sets of controls and regression weights. Our preferred quasi-experimental specification
reweights control observations to achieve covariate balance across
weatherized and unweatherized controls, explained in more detail
below.
Of course, it is possible that the effect of a WAP weatherization varies across households (i.e., *β* *i* ) based on observables or unobservables. Indeed, it is possible that households sort into WAP


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1613

participation based on knowledge of their idiosyncratic returns;
this has been labeled “essential heterogeneity” (Heckman, Urzua,
and Vytlacil 2006). In the presence of heterogeneity in how weatherization retrofits affect residential energy consumption, the expectation of unbiased quasi-experimental and experimental estimates of *β* *i* need not be equivalent. The quasi-experimental approach is designed to provide an estimate of the average treatment
effect on all treated households (ATET). In contrast, with some
additional assumptions (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996), the
randomized encouragement design estimates the so-called local
average treatment effect (LATE), or the average effect for the subset of the population who must be encouraged to participate in the
program (i.e., the compliers). Therefore, significant differences in
the quasi-experimental and experimental estimates could be due
to bias in the former or differences in the LATE and ATET. Section
5.2 and Section 6 of the Online Appendix explore the sources of the
differences in our quasi-experimental and experimental estimates
of the effect of WAP weatherization.

IV. D ATA S OURCES AND S UMMARY S TATISTICS

*IV.A. Data Sources*

The data collected to support this analysis correspond to two
overlapping groups of households. The first group comprises the
34,161 households in our experimental sample drawn from the
counties served by our two partner CAAs. The second group of
households corresponds to our quasi-experimental research design. Because this design did not require the same degree of coordination with our agency partners, we were able to expand the
scope of this sample by collecting detailed data from three more
implementing agencies. The quasi-experimental sample includes
the 7,304 households that applied for weatherization assistance
at these five agencies. The quasi-experimental sample is smaller
overall but has a larger number of applicants and weatherized
households relative to the experimental sample. The two groups
overlap as 1,773 applicant households are also part of our experimental sample.

*1. Energy Consumption Data.* We obtained monthly natural
gas and electricity consumption data over the period June 2008
to May 2014. This period includes at least two years of preretrofit


-----

1614 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

data for all weatherized households in our sample. The utility data
track monthly kilowatt-hours (kWh) of electricity and thousand
cubic feet (Mcf) of gas used at the dwelling. Some specifications
convert both natural gas and electricity consumption to million
British thermal units (MMBtu) using the conversion factor employed by the NEAT audit tool.
Energy consumption records obtained from the utility are
merged with households in our experimental sample and the
applicant data obtained from the five implementing agencies.
Data are merged using detailed name and address information.
Not all households find an exact match in consumption records.
Match rates are 88% and 81% in our experimental and quasiexperimental samples, respectively. The higher match rate in our
experimental sample is to be expected; when selecting this sample we focused exclusively on postal codes within the territory of
our partner utility. Online Appendix 2 provides more detail on
missing data and attrition. After dropping observations with no
match, our experimental sample is 28,888.

*2. Application Data.* We obtained the data about households
collected through the application process, including information
used to determine program eligibility (e.g., income, household size,
number of children) and information that can be used to prioritize
successful applicants (e.g., elderly residents). Application materials also collect other demographic characteristics, including race
and education. These data are used to assess balance across the
quasi-experimental treatment and control groups.

*3. Efficiency Audit Data.* Detailed information about the
dwelling is collected during the household-level energy efficiency
audit, which is a critical part of the WAP implementation. An
output of these audits is the list of energy efficiency measures
for which projected energy savings exceed projected costs. These
are the measures that comprise the weatherization retrofit. We
acquired the job reports filed after the weatherization retrofit is
completed. These allow us to confirm that the recommended measures were installed and to compare realized costs with projections.

*4. Indoor Temperature Data.* Two years after the encouragement effort was initiated, we randomly selected a subset of weatherized and unweatherized households for a field survey. These
households were selected from the quasi-experimental sample.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1615

The primary purpose of the survey was to measure thermostat set
points and indoor temperatures to test for a direct rebound effect.
Michigan field staff attempted to contact 6,400 households on
cold days (projected maximum temperature below 45 [◦] F) in March
and early April 2013. With the homeowner’s permission, surveyors
entered the home, closed the door, moved to the center of the room,
and recorded multiple indoor air temperature measurements using two different thermometers. Of our initially targeted sample,
surveyors spoke with 1,658 homeowners. Of these, 899 allowed us
to enter their homes and record their thermostat set point, and
688 allowed us to close the door and collect two or more indoor
thermometer readings.

*5. Demographic* *Data.* Detailed data on occupant and
dwelling characteristics are not available for the households in
our study that did not apply for weatherization assistance. To construct a more complete picture, we map households in the study to
census-block-level data on variables of interest (such as home age,
poverty level of residents). We use these data to assess balance
in observable characteristics across our experimental encouraged
and control groups.

*IV.B. Summary Statistics*

Table II summarizes pretreatment information on the households in both the experimental and quasi-experimental samples.
The top panel summarizes monthly energy consumption during
the two years immediately preceding the treatment period. The
first two columns summarize means for the randomized encouragement and experimental control groups, respectively. The third
column reports *p* -values for the differences between the treatment
and control groups.
There are seasonal patterns in energy consumption that differ
across natural gas and electricity. Winter natural gas consumption (which is dominated by space heating) is significantly higher
than summer gas use (composed primarily of hot water heating
and cooking). Electricity usage is fairly consistent across seasons.
Because households in the experimental sample were randomly
assigned to the encouraged and control groups, it is unsurprising
that differences in energy consumption across these two groups
are all small and statistically indistinguishable from zero.
The table also provides an opportunity to judge the credibility of the comparisons that underlie the quasi-experimental


-----

1616 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1617

estimates. The fourth column reports on all weatherized households in the territory covered by the five CAAs. The fifth column summarizes households in these territories that applied for
weatherization but had not received weatherization assistance
as of April 2014. In practice, the variation in the weatherization
dates means that the identification of the quasi-experimental estimator is not just based on comparisons between the samples
summarized in columns (4) and (5), but also relies on withinhousehold comparisons. It is nevertheless informative to compare
these sets of households. *p* -values for the mean differences in
column (6) show that weatherized households have historically
consumed significantly less natural gas than the unweatherized
applicants during both winter and summer months.
To assess the balance in characteristics other than energy consumption across the experimental control and encouraged groups,
we locate households in the experimental sample within census
blocks and summarize dwelling and household information at the
census-block level. Panel B summarizes these data. *p* -values in
column (3) account for clustering within census blocks. None of
these differences in group means are statistically distinguishable
from zero.

Table II, Panel C summarizes the detailed demographic information and dwelling characteristics that are collected for most
clients as part of the application process. Our summary of these
variables focuses exclusively on program applicants because these
data are not available for the majority of households in the experimental sample that did not apply to the program. Column (6)
documents important differences between the weatherized and
unweatherized applicant subsamples. Note that differences across
Panels B and C should be interpreted carefully because variables
are measured differently across the two data sources. For example, income reported in Panel B summarizes incomes at the census
block level and includes all income received on a regular basis.
Income reported for the purpose of determining weatherization
program eligibility (measured at the household level and summarized in Panel C) includes cash receipts (e.g., wages, salaries, pensions) but excludes other potential income sources (capital gains,
tax refunds, or housing allowances). Weatherized households have
higher incomes compared with unsuccessful applicants. In addition, applicants who ultimately receive weatherization are further
above the poverty line, which adjusts for household size, than are
the unsuccessful applicants. Weatherized households also report


-----

1618 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

having more children, are more likely to report an elderly or disabled resident, and are more likely to use natural gas as their
primary heat source.
The significant differences between the weatherized and unweatherized applicants motivate us to reweight observations in
the control group so that observable factors are distributed similarly in applicant groups. Although our preferred specifications
include household-by-month-of-sample fixed effects that control
for all time-invariant differences between households, we are concerned that observable fixed differences might be correlated with
time-varying differences. We use an estimated propensity score
to balance covariates that presumably play a role in determining
program take-up. Online Appendix 3 provides a detailed discussion of the participation equation we estimate. Table II, column
(7) reports *p* -values for the mean differences between weatherized households and matched controls. Reassuringly, the differences in average covariate values across weatherized households
and propensity-score weighted controls are statistically indistinguishable.
In the Online Appendix, Table A.1 summarizes some of the
detailed information collected during the household energy efficiency audits. A typical weatherization retrofit involved several
measures such as furnace replacement (34% of retrofits), attic insulation (85%), wall insulation (44%), and infiltration reduction
(76%). The NEAT model predicts that on average these investments will reduce natural gas consumption by 46% and electricity
consumption by 15%. The average project involved over $5,150 in
total expenditures. This includes materials, labor, and construction costs, but does not include any program overhead. Using a 3%
discount rate, the projected net present value of energy bill savings average $10,611. The average projected savings:investment
ratio (across measures) exceeds 2:1.

V. R ESULTS

*V.A. Experimental Estimates of Energy Savings*

*1. First-Stage: Program Take-Up.* It may seem straightforward to encourage households to participate in a program that
provides free efficiency retrofits worth an average of approximately $5,000 that are designed to significantly reduce energy
expenditures. In our experience, that was hardly the case. The


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1619

TABLE III

R ANDOMIZED E NCOURAGEMENT : R ETURN ON E FFORT

Application Efficiency Weatherization
audit complete
(1) (2) (3)

Base rate 0.02 [∗∗] 0.01 [∗∗] 0.01 [∗∗]

( *<* 0.01) ( *<* 0.01) ( *<* 0.01)

Encouragement 0.13 [∗∗] 0.05 [∗∗] 0.05 [∗∗]

( *<* 0.01) ( *<* 0.01) ( *<* 0.01)
Households 28,888 28,888 28,888

*Notes.* The table shows the effect of our encouragement on program applications, efficiency audits, and
weatherization. Indicators of program participation status are regressed on an encouragement indicator and
a constant. The unit of observation is a household. [∗] Significant at the 5% level; [∗∗] significant at the 1% level.

impact of reducing barriers to participation (e.g., information
and process costs) on program uptake is of independent interest both to policy makers and researchers. This section evaluates the impact of our intervention on a multipart participation

process.

Table III summarizes program take-up at three separate
junctures. In the first stage, our goal was to increase the share
of households filing applications. The coefficient estimate in column (1) indicates that the encouragement intervention increased
the rate of application to the program by 13 percentage points
from the control group mean of 2%. Column (2) reveals that the
fraction of households who received an energy audit was 5 percentage points higher in the encouraged group (off a base of
about 1%). As we discussed already, several factors can explain
why so many households that submit an application are not audited, including if the household fails to follow through on requests for more information or if the submitted information indicates that the household does not meet the program’s eligibility
requirements.

Table III, Column (3), documents that the treatment increased the fraction of households that were successfully weatherized by about 5 percentage points, against a 1% rate in the
control group. [14] The encouragement treatment is a statistically

14. A small fraction of households get audited but not weatherized, primarily
because the auditors deem the home a possible danger to weatherization contractors (e.g., due to the presence of asbestos).


-----

1620 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

significant predictor of weatherization, which we will use to instrument for program participation.
The low take-up rates in the encouraged group are quite
striking. Program participants receive substantive home improvements, yet incur no out-of-pocket expenses. All households in the
encouraged group received some information about the program
via a phone call or door hanger. A majority of households (i.e., those
who spoke with our canvassers in person or by phone) received further information about our offer of application assistance. Given
that households had detailed, specific information about the program, it seems reasonable to surmise that some combination of
high perceived costs of applying for the program, low expectation
of an application leading to a weatherization, high unmeasured
process costs, and low expected benefits of participating in the
program are impediments to WAP participation. In the end, the
average cost of encouragement per completed weatherization was
about $1,050, which is more than 20% of the average costs of measures installed. See Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram (2015) for
further details.

*2. IV Estimates of Energy Savings.* Figure II provides a
graphical overview of the experimental estimates. The broken line
shows the cumulative effect of the randomly assigned encouragement intervention on the monthly rate of weatherization, relative
to the control group which received no encouragement. This effect
increases over time as the treatment households submit applications and receive weatherization assistance. The figure also plots
month-by-month estimates of intent to treat (ITT) effects on energy consumption. Conceptually, monthly estimates of the local
average effect of weatherization on energy consumption can be
constructed as a ratio of the monthly ITT estimates and the corresponding effect of encouragement on program participation.

Table IV, Panel A summarizes results that relate measures
of energy consumption to the WAP participation indicator. In the
first two columns, the dependent variable is the log of total energy
consumption (MMBtu/month). In the third and fourth columns,
the dependent variables are the log of natural gas and electricity consumption, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by
household in all specifications.
For comparison, the first column reports the coefficient associated with the WAP indicator from an OLS regression with
month of-sample and household-month fixed effects that is fit to


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1621

2011m1 2011m7 2012m1 2012m7 2013m1 2013m7 2014m1 2014m7

Month of Sample

F IGURE II

Effect of Encouragement on Participation and Energy Consumption

This figure provides an overview of the local average treatment effect estimates.
The broken line tracks the cumulative difference in participation rates across the
encouraged and control groups. The circular markers plot the monthly estimates
of the intent-to-treat effects on household energy consumption (in logs).

the experimental sample. This specification indicates that WAP
participation is associated with a 10% decline in energy consumption.
The IV estimates based on our randomized encouragement
design are reported in columns (2)–(4). The estimate in column (2)
indicates that WAP participation causes a reduction in monthly
energy consumption of approximately 20% among households that
were encouraged into the WAP program. This is the first indication that the realized savings from the WAP-induced energy efficiency investments are substantially smaller than the projections
from the engineering model. Columns (3) and (4) report local average treatment effects for natural gas and electricity, respectively.
Natural gas accounts for 94% of projected savings (measured in
MMBtu), so it is not surprising that natural gas consumption is
more significantly affected by weatherization. [15]

15. The coefficient in column (2) is not a weighted average of the gas and
electricity coefficients in columns (3) and (4) for two reasons. First, the samples
differ slightly across the columns, and second the coefficients on the fixed effects


-----

1622 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

TABLE IV

E XPERIMENTAL E STIMATED I MPACTS OF W EATHERIZATION ON H OUSEHOLD E NERGY

C ONSUMPTION

Total energy Gas Electricity

OLS-FE IV-FE IV-FE IV-FE

(1) (2) (3) (4)

Panel A: Dependent variable is monthly energy consumption (in logs)

WAP −0.10 [∗∗] −0.20 [∗] −0.21 [∗∗] −0.10

(0.01) (0.08) (0.08) (0.10)
Imputed counterfactual consumption 7.52 6.39 2.13
MMBtu/month

*F* -statistic — 267.41 [∗∗] 261.06 [∗∗] 266.78 [∗∗]

Households 27,990 27,229 26,054 27,115
Observations 1,662,781 1,653,583 1,528,526 1,638,337

Panel B: Present value of (discounted) savings

Time horizon Discount rate

3% 6% 10%

10 years $1,983 $1,711 $1,428
16 years $2,920 $2,349 $1,819
20 years $3,459 $2,666 $1,979

*Notes.* Dependent variable measures log of monthly household energy consumption. Panel A reports regression coefficients. With the exception of the first column, all specifications are estimated using 2SLS. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by household. Panel B reports savings projections generated by NEAT
audit. All regressions include month-of-sample and household-month fixed effects. [∗] Significant at the 5%
level; [∗∗] significant at the 1% level.

Our IV strategy is predicated on an exclusion restriction: we
assume that our encouragement activities affected energy consumption only through its effect on participation in the WAP program. To informally test whether the treatment’s encouragement
activities had a direct effect on energy consumption, we test for
an effect of our encouragement activities on the households in the
encouraged group that did not receive weatherization assistance.

and other covariates are not constrained to be equal in columns (3) and (4). It is
also worth noting that the effect of weatherization on gas consumption is more
precisely estimated. This is not surprising, because natural gas consumption is
driven primarily by the end uses targeted by weatherization (space and water
heating), whereas electricity consumption is derived from many end uses that are
unaffected by weatherization (e.g., lighting and appliances).


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1623

We fail to reject the null of no effect on energy consumption among
these households. [16]

Table IV, Panel B computes the present value of the estimated energy savings under alternative assumptions about investment time horizons and discount rates. To express the estimates of monthly energy savings in dollar terms, we first impute
the average consumption among unweatherized compliers. [17] Estimates of monthly natural gas savings (in percentage terms, based
on the coefficient in column (3)) are multiplied by the product
of this imputed average monthly gas consumption among control
group compliers and the residential retail price of natural gas in
Michigan in 2013 (EIA 2015). [18] Similarly, average 2013 electricity
savings (in percentage terms, based on the coefficient in column
(4)) are multiplied by the product of average monthly electricity consumption among control group compliers and the retail

16. To conduct this test, we drop all households receiving weatherization
assistance from the experimental sample. Using the remaining households, we
regress the log of monthly energy consumption on an indicator that equals 0 before encouragement activities were initiated and 1 after they began in March
2011 for all households assigned to the encouraged group. We estimate a precise zero effect, which suggests that our encouragement intervention had no effect on energy use in these households and supports the validity of the exclusion restriction. Of course, our exclusion restriction also implies that the encouragement intervention does not directly effect energy consumption among households taking up the weatherization treatment, but we cannot test this assumption
directly.
17. In Table III we estimate the share of always takers and compliers in the
population to be 1% and 5%, respectively. We directly observe the average energy
consumption among unweatherized households in the encouraged group (i.e., the
never takers) during the postassignment period. We also observe the average
consumption among unweatherized households during the postassignment period
in the control group. Because this represents a weighted average of consumption
across never takers and compliers, we can impute the average postassignment
consumption among unweatherized compliers. This is the imputed counterfactual
consumption reported in Table IV.
18. The average retail price of natural gas in Michigan in 2013 was
$10.46/MMBtu (expressed in $2013). This is higher than the average price charged
by this utility over the entire treatment period ($7.98/MMBtu). Natural gas prices
were at historic lows over this period, so using the observed average price would
likely underestimate the real prices that will prevail over the life of these investments. Prices in 2013 are somewhat lower than the average real prices over the
period 2000–2013. The shale gas boom has arguably ushered in a new domestic price regime, such that a longer average real price will overestimate future
prices.


-----

1624 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

electricity price ($0.11/kWh). [19] Taken together, our estimate of
average energy savings is approximately $233 a year.
To compute the net present value of energy savings over the
useful life of the improvements, we invoke some additional assumptions. First, we rely on the NEAT simulation program’s assumptions about measure-specific life spans. These projected life
spans range from 3 years (for a furnace tune-up) to 20 years (for
attic insulation). The energy savings-weighted average life span
for installed measures in our data set is 16 years. In the table,
we report discounted benefits with assumed life spans of 10, 16,
and 20 years. We also assume that the effect of weatherization on
energy consumption—and real energy prices—do not vary over
the life of the measure. Discounted benefits are calculated at discount rates of 3%, 6%, and 10% (see columns).
The estimated energy savings are small relative to the projected savings and the upfront costs. Our estimates imply energy
savings of 17 MMBtu a year, whereas the average projected savings among compliers is 56 MMBtu (aggregating electricity and
gas measured in terms of site energy content). Our central estimate of the realized average savings per household is roughly
$2,349. This is significantly lower than the average net present
value of savings predicted by the ex ante engineering analysis
which is $9,810 among compliers (and $10,611 averaged across
all weatherized households in our data). [20] The nine estimates of
the present value of the savings range from approximately $1,428
(high discount rate and short time horizon) to about $3,500 (low
discount rate and long time horizon). These estimates are just
31% to 76% of the average upfront cost of the energy efficiency
measures among compliers. [21]

19. The NEAT program audits assume an electricity price of $0.11/kWh and
a natural gas price of $11.46/MMBtu. The higher gas price is presumably based
on 2006 prices, which averaged around $11.50/MMBtu in this service territory in
2006.

20. The average present discounted savings among weatherized households
in the control group was projected to be $10,989. The average projected discounted
savings among weatherized households in the encouraged group is $9,982. We
estimate that compliers account for 85% of weatherized households in the encouraged group. We thus impute that the average projected savings among complier
households is $9,810.
21. To compute these percentages, we use an average cost of $4,585 among
compliers. To construct this average, we use our estimate that 85% of weatherized households in the encouraged group are compliers. We observe the average
cost among always takers in the control group to be $5,363. We interpret the


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1625

TABLE V

Q UASI  - EXPERIMENTAL E STIMATED I MPACTS OF W EATHERIZATION ON H OUSEHOLD
E NERGY C ONSUMPTION

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Panel A: Dependent variable is monthly energy consumption (in logs)

WAP −0.08 [∗∗] −0.09 [∗∗] −0.08 [∗∗] −0.09 [∗∗] −0.10 [∗∗] −0.10 [∗∗]

(0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)

Month-of-sample FE Y N Y N Y N
Month-of-sample x county FE N Y N Y N Y
*p* -score matched sample N N N N Y Y

Adjusted *R* -squared 0.85 0.86 0.83 0.83 0.80 0.81
Households 5,013 5,013 3,334 3,334 3,404 3,404
Observations 282,196 282,196 183,353 183,353 188,287 188,287

Panel B: Present value of (discounted) savings

Time horizon Discount rate

3% 6% 10%
10 years $1,393 $1,202 $1,004
16 years $2,052 $1,651 $1,278
20 years $2,430 $1,873 $1,391

*Notes.* Panel A reports estimates of the reduction in monthly energy consumption following weatherization.
The dependent variable is the log of monthly household energy consumption (electricity and natural gas)
measured in MMBtu. All columns include household-by-month-of-sample and month-by-region fixed effects.
Columns (1) and (2) use data from all weatherization applicants while columns (3) and (4) use a sample limited
to implementing agencies that participated in the experiment as well as applicants that applied after the
encouragement intervention was initiated. Columns (5) and (6) report estimates comparable to columns (1)
and (2) reweighted by the propensity score. Average monthly consumption is 8.13 MMBtu for all applicants
and 9.68 MMBtu for the limited sample. The propensity score weighted average is 9.33 MMBtu per month.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the household level. Panel B reports the net present value of
energy savings implied by the preferred estimate reported in column (6). Reductions in energy bills associated
with the estimates in column (6) are assumed to accrue over the life of the measure using a range of discount
rates and assumed time horizons. [∗] Significant at the 5% level; [∗∗] significant at the 1% level.

*V.B. Quasi-experimental Estimates of Energy Savings*

Table V presents the quasi-experimental estimates based on
the estimation of equation (1). The dependent variable in all regressions is the log of monthly energy consumption (i.e., the sum
of electricity and natural gas, both measured in MMBtu). The
first two columns use data from all weatherization applicants,
with the second specification allowing time period effects to vary
across counties. Columns (3) and (4) trim the sample to obtain
estimates that are more directly comparable to the experimental

average cost among weatherized households in the encouraged group, $4,698, to
be a weighted average across compliers and always takers. Note that the range of
the percentages could be different if we had household-level estimates of savings
and treatment costs.


-----

1626 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

-12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Relative Quarter

F IGURE III

Event Study Analysis: Matched Quasi-experimental Sample

This figure reports estimated weatherization effects by quarter before and after
the weatherization was completed based on the quasi-experimental estimates reported in column (1) of Table V. The time zero effect captures energy consumption
in the month of the weatherization. The effects are also allowed to vary by the
realized weather in the quarter. See text for details.

estimates. Specifically, this sample is limited to the implementing
agencies that participated in the experiment and to applicants
that applied after the encouragement intervention was initiated.
Columns (5) and (6) report estimates comparable to columns (1)
and (2) reweighted by the propensity score. [22]

The first row in Table V reports the estimated average treatment effect. Across the columns, the estimates suggest that WAP
participation reduces energy consumption by roughly 8–10%.

Figure III provides another perspective on the results in
Table V. It reports on the estimation of a version of the column (1) specification, except the weatherization indicator is interacted with indicator variables for each of the potential quarters before and after weatherization was completed (the time
zero effect captures energy consumption in the month of weatherization). We also interact the quarter indicators with heating

22. Because some of the covariates included in the propensity score estimating
equation (e.g., reported disability and number of children) are not reported by all
households, this sample is somewhat smaller.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1627

degree days (HDD) and HDD squared, to account for the fact
that weatherization retrofits may lead to higher energy savings
during colder quarters. [23] The figure then plots the coefficients on
the quarter dummy variables plus the coefficients on the HDD
and HDD squared variables multiplied by the average HDD and
HDD squared for the corresponding month. We also plot 95% confidence intervals associated with these coefficient sums. The decline
in energy consumption is apparent and seems roughly constant
throughout the period of our study.

Table V, Panel B computes the present value of the estimated
energy savings using essentially the same approach described in
Section II. To estimate monetary savings, we need to disaggregate our energy savings estimates by fuel. We estimate equation
(1) separately for gas and electricity, respectively (see Online Appendix 4). Again, the energy savings are small relative to the
upfront costs. The nine estimates of the present value of the savings range from approximately $1,000 (high discount rate and
short time horizon) to about $2,400 (low discount rate and long
time horizon). These estimates are between 22% and 53% of the
average upfront cost of the energy efficiency retrofits.
The experimentally estimated LATE of weatherization on energy consumption is approximately twice as large as the quasiexperimental estimate of the average effect among all households receiving weatherization assistance. Online Appendix 6 documents that there are significant observable differences between
the group of complier households in the experimental sample and
the weatherized households in the quasi-experimental sample,
but they only explain about 30% of the difference between the
experimental and quasi-experimental treatment effect estimates.
“Essential heterogeneity” (Heckman, Urzua, and Vytlacil
2006), where households sort into participation based on their
gains, is a potential explanation, but the data fail to support standard sorting stories because the experimentally estimated LATE
exceeds the estimated ATET from the quasi-experimental sample where households choose to participate in WAP without our

23. Heating degree days reflect the difference between the outdoor temperature and a base temperature of 65 [◦] F. A day’s HDD equal 0 for days when the
hourly temperature exceeds 65 [◦] F for all hours of the day. It is equal to a weighted
difference between 65 [◦] F and hourly temperatures when the temperature dips below the base. Weights are determined by the share of hours at each temperature.
Quarterly HDDs sum daily HDDs over all days in the quarter.


-----

1628 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

encouragement. Measurement error is perhaps a more likely explanation; specifically, the results are consistent with the possibility that the quasi-experimental estimates are attenuated due
to measurement error and that the experimentally derived IV
removes this bias. Indeed, the finding that the OLS estimate in
column (1) of Table IV is comparable to the quasi-experimental
estimator is striking and consistent with measurement error playing an important role here. [24] Finally, we are using different (albeit
overlapping) data sets to implement the experimental and quasiexperimental estimation, so the differences in the estimated parameters could be due to sampling variation.

*V.C. Household Reoptimizing Behavior, Building Thermal*
*Properties, and the Welfare Implications of Rebound*

This section implements the utility-maximization framework
outlined in Section II to bound the average willingness to pay for
any efficiency-induced increase in energy services.
*Does Weatherization Lead to Temperature “Take Back”?* We
first test for an effect of weatherization on household demand for
space heating. Table VI summarizes the results from our survey
of indoor air temperatures and thermostat set points collected
during the winter of 2013 at a subset of our quasi-experimental
households. All weatherized households surveyed had received
efficiency improvements at least one year before the survey was
administered, allowing plenty of time for residents to observe the
extent to which the weatherization retrofit affected winter heating
costs. A total of 899 households allowed our survey team to enter
their home to record the thermostat set point, and 688 allowed our
surveyors to linger long enough to record the actual indoor temperature. Approximately half of the households for which we have
thermostat or temperature data had received weatherization assistance (453/899 and 349/688). The remaining households in the
control group had applied for—but not received—weatherization
assistance. Anticipating some measurement error, we used two
different devices to measure indoor temperatures at each home.

Table VI reports results from regressing thermometer readings and thermostat set points on a binary variable indicating

24. Measurement error could exist, for instance, if there are typos in the
CAAs’ paperwork that cause some household to be incorrectly labeled as program
participants. It is noteworthy that the results are robust to requiring more and
less documentation from the CAAs to define a household as “weatherized.”


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1629

TABLE VI

I NDOOR T EMPERATURE S URVEY R ESULTS

Thermometer Thermostat

(1) (2) (3) (4)

Indoor temperature response to weatherization

Base temperature 72.36 [∗∗] 72.17 [∗∗] 69.26 [∗∗] 68.96 [∗∗]

(0.95) (1.25) (0.96) (1.37)

Weatherized home 0.57 0.67 −0.57 −0.57

(0.41) (0.44) (0.29) (0.32)
Heating degree days −0.16 [∗∗] −0.15 [∗∗] 0.04 0.05
(0.03) (0.04) (0.03) (0.04)
Propensity score weights? N Y N Y
*R* -squared 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01
Observations 1,359 1,359 899 899

*Notes.* The table reports measured indoor temperature differentials across weatherized (WAP) and unweatherized households. Columns (1) and (2) have the indoor thermometer temperature reading as a dependent variable, while columns (3) and (4) use the survey thermostat readings. Columns (2) and (4) are weighted
so that the surveyed population better represents the total quasi-experimental sample. Standard errors are
clustered at the household level. [∗] Significant at the 5% level; [∗∗] significant at the 1% level.

whether the household had been weatherized. [25] Columns (1) and
(3) report results from our base specification. Survey respondents
comprise a nonrandom subset of our sample as only a fraction
of the targeted household were home and/or willing to open the
door to receive our surveyors. Furthermore, only 41% of households who opened the door to our surveyors allowed us to come
in and collect temperature measurements. We observe differences
between survey respondents and the larger sample along potentially important dimensions (such as past energy use and demographics). We estimate specifications where survey household observations are weighted to improve the match in covariate means
with the larger quasi-experimental sample. [26] These results are
reported in columns (2) and (4). All specifications control for the

25. If surveyors recorded temperatures from both devices, the temperature
specifications include two measurements per household. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.

26. For both the thermostat set point and indoor temperature samples, we
make pairwise comparisons of observable household and dwelling characteristics
across weatherized and unweatherized surveyed households and the larger quasiexperimental sample. The surveyed subsample is observationally similar among
most (but not all) dimensions. For example, for both dependent variables, survey
respondents are significantly more likely to report having children or elderly family
members, less likely to be unemployed, and are more likely to use gas as their


-----

1630 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

outdoor temperature on the day of the survey, measured by heating degree days (HDDs).
Columns (1) and (2) show that after controlling for outdoor temperatures, indoor temperatures may be slightly warmer
at weatherized households. The point estimate is imprecisely
estimated; we fail to reject the null of 0. The coefficient associated with the HDD variable is statistically significantly
negative in the temperature specifications, suggesting that indoor temperatures measure lower on colder days. Although we
asked surveyors to wait several minutes before recording temperatures, this finding suggests that cold air brought with the
surveyor could be affecting the measurements. Because the
standard errors of our estimates do not allow us to reject
a small increase in indoor temperatures, we estimate an upper bound on possible welfare gains using an estimated increase in temperature of 0.67 [◦] F based on the point estimate in
column (2). [27]

Columns (3) and (4) suggest that weatherized households set
their thermostats lower, on average, by approximately 0.6 [◦] F. This
is inconsistent with a rebound in demand for indoor heat. A decrease in thermostat settings may seem inconsistent with the suggestive evidence of an increase in indoor air temperatures. One
possible explanation is that retrofits, by reducing cold air infiltration, allow households to maintain the same (or slightly higher)
levels of indoor comfort at lower thermostat set points. It is also
potentially relevant that the study period covers the aftermath
of the Great Recession when the marginal utility of income was
elevated.

*2. Building Energy Performance.* To estimate how a given
increase in demand for indoor space heating translates to an
increase in monthly gas consumption, we need to estimate the
thermal properties of a representative building. We use the socalled degree day method to model the energy required to increase

primary source of heat, as compared with the larger quasi-experimental sample.
Among unweatherized households, surveyed households tend to be larger.
27. The positive coefficient on the weatherization dummy in columns (1) and
(2) appears sensitive to outliers in our data, which may reflect coding errors by
our survey team. For example, when we trim the sample by excluding the top
and bottom 5% of the observations, the coefficient on a specification equivalent to
column (2) is 0.01 (std. err. = 0.27). The results on the thermostat set point are
not sensitive to data trimming.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1631

temperatures in an average home in our data (Thorpe 2013). The
literature that analyzes energy use in buildings commonly assumes a linear relationship between energy consumption and the
difference between outdoor temperatures and a temperature that
people find comfortable indoors (e.g., Friedman 1987; Dyson et al.
2014). We find empirical support for this assumption in our setting.
In residential buildings, it is standard to summarize the technical relationship between energy consumption and heating demand by regressing energy consumption on HDDs. Specifically,
we estimate the following equation:

*C* *imt* = *α* *i* + *β* 1 **1** { *W AP* } *imt* + *β* 2 *HDD* *mt* + *β* 3 *HDD* *mt* ∗ 1{ *W AP* } *imt*

(3) + *β* 4 *HDD* *mt* [2] [+] *[ β]* [5] *[HDD]* *mt* [2] [∗] [1][{] *[W AP]* [}] *[imt]* *[,]*

where *C* *imt* measures the natural gas consumption at household *i* in month *m* and year *t* . We estimate this equation using
data collected from program applicants during winter months
(September–March) over the entire sample period. Panel data allow us to include household-level fixed effects in this regression.
We include both a linear and a quadratic HDD term, allowing
each coefficient to vary with weatherization status, as well as a
separate intercept for WAP participants.
All of the estimated coefficients in equation (3) are highly statistically significant and very precisely estimated. The *R* -squared
value is 0.69. The estimated slope of the relationship is less steep
among weatherized homes. That is, weatherizations effectively
reduce the marginal cost of indoor space heating during the winter. Moreover, it is noteworthy that this relationship is approximately linear though we estimated quadratic terms. Online Appendix Figure A.2 summarizes the estimated relationship, which
is analogous to the bottom panel of Figure I (flipped into the top
quadrant).
We can use this estimated relationship between HDD and
monthly energy consumption to estimate the effect of increased
demand for indoor temperatures on energy consumption and associated expenditures. This approach assumes that a household’s
choice of the indoor temperature is independent of outdoor temperatures, thus outdoor temperatures are a valid proxy for the


-----

1632 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

desired level of heating services. [28] The product of the slope of
the relationship between natural gas consumption and HDD (estimated from equation (3)) and the average natural gas price in
the postencouragement period provides a measure of the marginal
cost of gas heating. Among unweatherized households, this product is equal to approximately $0.072 per HDD (or $2.17 per heating degree month). The analogous calculation for weatherized
households leads to an estimated marginal cost of $0.056 per HDD
(or $1.67 per heating degree month). This implies that weatherization led to a reduction in the marginal cost of approximately
20%. [29]

*3. Bounding the Average Valuation of Increased Indoor Heat.*
Estimates of the marginal costs of heating among weatherized and
unweatherized households can be combined with the estimated
0.67 [◦] F increase in indoor temperatures (see Table VI, column (2))
to bound the average welfare gain from weatherized households’
reoptimization. [30] The lower bound of households’ valuation of the
higher temperatures is given by 0.67 [◦] F * $1.67/degree month or
$1.12 per winter month. At this lower bound, the utility gains from
increased warmth are exactly offset by the increase in the energy
expenditures incurred to achieve the temperature increase, implying a zero gain in welfare.
To define the upper bound, we note that by revealed preference, unweatherized households chose not to pay 0.67 [◦] F *
$2.17/degree month or $1.45 per winter month to achieve this
incremental increase in temperature. It follows that average
marginal benefits from this temperature increase cannot exceed
$1.45 per winter month. Since increasing indoor temperatures
by 0.67 [◦] F costs the average weatherized household $1.12 per

28. Note that this assumption is consistent with the results in Table VI, which
fail to reject that there is no relationship between HDD and thermostat set point.
29. These estimates of incremental heating costs are comparable to a “rule
of thumb” popularized by the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.
This rule states that a household will pay approximately 3% on their gas bill
for a 1 [◦] [F increase in winter thermostat settings (see, for example, http://www.](http://www.improvement.com/a/5-easy-ways-to-lower-your-gas-bill-during-the-winter)
[improvement.com/a/5-easy-ways-to-lower-your-gas-bill-during-the-winter). Aver-](http://www.improvement.com/a/5-easy-ways-to-lower-your-gas-bill-during-the-winter)
age natural gas bills during winter months are $85.95 and $57.96 at unweatherized and weatherized homes, respectively.
30. Because the relationship between heating services and energy consumption is approximately linear, the average temperature increase yields the average
willingness to pay for heating services.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1633

winter month, the average net gain from the weatherizationinduced increase in warmth does not exceed $0.33 per winter
month. Assuming six full winter months in Michigan, this implies an upper bound on the annual welfare gain of roughly $1.98
from higher indoor temperature.
In sum, this bounding exercise suggests that the welfare gains
from any efficiency-induced rebound in heating demand are very
small, likely less than 1% of the energy expenditure savings. Put
another way, the efficiency-induced rebound in demand for indoor
heating appears to be inconsequential in this setting. Our methodology also allows us to calculate the potential welfare gains from
much larger increases in indoor temperatures. Note that even a
10 [◦] F increase in indoor temperatures would lead to a welfare gain
of less than $30 a year.

VI. I NTERPRETATION

*VI.A. Returns on Residential Energy Efficiency Investments*

Table VII, Panel A evaluates the internal rate of return
(IRR) on energy efficiency investment from a private perspective. More precisely, we report the discount rate at which the
discounted value of average avoided energy expenditures exactly equals the average upfront investment. Although these
investments were free to participating households, it is nevertheless informative to estimate the private returns if households had been responsible for the upfront costs because most
households that consider the exact same investments do not
qualify for WAP. That is, in the broader population, the IRR
is a critical factor in determining take-up of energy efficiency
investments.
Column (1) computes the IRR using the average upfront
investment costs [31] and the average reductions in annual energy expenditures projected by the WAP program audit. These
savings are valued at the average retail residential natural
gas and electricity prices in 2013 as described already. Over
a range of time horizons, the estimated IRR is quite high, as
they should be given the investment rule that required projected savings exceed costs. The rate of return associated with

31. The upfront investment costs are calculated as the imputed average
installation, construction, and materials costs among compliers. The average cost
per household is $4,585.


-----

1634 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

TABLE VII

E STIMATED R ETURNS ON I NVESTMENTS IN E NERGY E FFICIENCY

Time Ex ante (NEAT) Empirical
horizon projections estimates
(1) (2)

Panel A: Private internal rate of return

10 years 7.0% −10.6%
16 years 11.9% −2.3%
20 years 13.0% 0.21%

Panel B: Private internal rate of return, adding the avoided emissions damages
10 years 11.4% −7.6%
16 years 15.5% 0.1%
20 years 16.4% 2.3%

Panel C: Social internal rate of return

10 years −3.9% −17.8%
16 years 3.1% −7.8%
20 years 5.0% −4.6%

Panel D: CO 2 abatement cost, 3% discount ($/ton CO 2 )
10 years $85 $322
16 years $38 $201
20 years $22 $161

Panel E: CO 2 abatement cost, 7% discount ($/ton CO 2 )
10 years $117 $404
16 years $71 $285
20 years $56 $248

*Notes.* All calculations use the average retrofit cost of $4,585. This is the imputed average expenditure for
compliers, constructed using ex post observed costs per weatherized household as reported by the implementing agencies. Column (1) reflects engineering projections of annual energy savings. In Panels B and C, column
(1) also incorporates the value of estimated emissions reductions (valued using a social cost of carbon value
of $38 per ton CO 2 and values for avoided local pollutants as described in the text). Column (2) replaces the
engineering estimates of energy savings with our experimental estimates of energy savings. Column (2) also
incorporates the upper bound on the net welfare gain from increased heating demand using our very small
and statistically insignificant point estimate of the upper bound on the efficiency-induced increase in welfare
associated with warmer indoor air temperatures. Panels D and E report the implied abatement cost per ton
CO 2 . These values divide the average levelized investment cost net of fuel savings by the estimated average
quantity of emissions avoided (measured in metric tons).

the savings-weighted average life span (i.e., 16 years) is approximately 12%. By this measure, efficiency investments supported
under WAP appear to be very attractive investments that greatly
exceed typical returns available in equity, real estate, and bond
markets.
The second column of Table VII replaces the projected savings with an estimate of the actual energy savings (in monetary
terms), derived from the randomized encouragement design, plus
a generous estimate of the welfare gain from higher indoor temperatures (i.e., the estimated upper bound of the monetized value


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1635

of the net welfare gain). [32] The estimate of realized savings is about

=
$232, which is only 36% ( $232/$653) of the average projected annual monetary savings. [33] When the upper bound of the monetized
value of the higher indoor temperatures is added to the energy
savings, the annual benefits are approximately $234. Using this
measure of annual benefits, the IRR is −10.6% for the 10-year
horizon, −2.3% for 16 years, and 0.2% for 20 years. Negative returns suggests that, at least for residential home retrofits, there
may not be much of an efficiency gap to explain. Investments with
these returns are infrequently taken up in the broader economy.
Panel B conducts a similar exercise but adds the value of
avoided emissions to the benefit side of the ledger. Avoided emissions of CO 2 are valued at $38 per ton (Greenstone, Kopits, and
Wolverton 2013). Nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide emissions
from residential gas consumption are valued at $250 per ton and
$970 per ton, respectively (Muller and Mendelsohn 2009). [34] The
IRRs for the 10-, 16-, and 20-year horizons are −7.6%, 0.1%, and
2.3%, respectively.
The societal perspective is especially important for judging
these investments, because a broad range of policies encourage
residential energy efficiency investments. Panel C reports estimates of the social IRR that are calculated using estimates of the
avoided marginal costs, rather than the retail prices, to monetize
the energy savings. These avoided costs are then added to the

32. As a basis of comparison, the lower bound is 0. However, the decision to
use the upper versus lower bound estimate has little impact on these calculations
because the estimated rebound effect is so small.

33. The experimental estimate of average energy savings (measured in
MMBtu) is 31% ( [17 MMBtu] 56 MMBtu [) of projected energy savings, lower than our estimate of]

the ratio of realized to projected annual monetary savings. This is because electricity is more expensive than natural gas on a per MMBtu basis, and electricity, for
which realized savings are closer to projected savings, thus makes up a relatively
larger share of the monetary savings.
34. We assume that burning natural gas emits 117 lbs CO 2 per MMBtu, 0.092
lbs NO *x* per MMBtu, and 0.000584 lbs SO 2 per MMBtu. We assume a marginal
operating emissions rate of 1.87 lbs CO 2 per kWh in the Midwest power sector
(Callaway, Fowlie, and McCormick 2015). Sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions from residential natural gas consumption are monetized using the median
marginal damage estimates in Muller and Mendelsohn (2009). NO *x* and SO 2 emissions from electricity generation are subject to a (barely) binding cap. To convert
energy savings measured at the site to emissions avoided at the power plant site,
we assume a 5% transmission and distribution line loss rate, based on EIA’s esti[mated nationwide loss rates of in 2013 (http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs).](http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs)


-----

1636 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

monetized value of the avoided emissions (as in Panel B). The
reason for this adjustment is that retail electricity and natural
gas prices used in Panels A and B include a fixed cost component;
energy providers recover a significant fraction of the fixed costs
of supplying energy (e.g., transmission and distribution investments) in their volumetric rates (Davis and Muehlegger 2010).
These fixed costs are not avoided when efficiency investments
reduce residential natural gas and electricity consumption. Most
electricity and natural gas distribution utilities are subject to costplus regulation, and in these cases, the fixed costs recovery will be
shifted to other customers, meaning that households that reduce
energy consumption receive a transfer from other households by
reducing their contribution to covering fixed costs. We use the average of the 2013 spot prices ($3.73/MMBtu) set at the Henry Hub
distribution point, a standard reference price for natural gas in
North America, to reflect the true marginal cost of natural gas
over the lifetime of the measures. [35] To value reductions in electricity consumption, we use the average wholesale price in the
Midwest electricity market and assume transmission and distribution losses of 5%.
These adjustments are reported in Panel C and lead to a
meaningful decrease in the IRR, relative to the IRRs in Panels A
and B. For example, the social IRR for the 16-year time horizon is
−7.8%; it is −17.8% and −4.6% for the 10- and 20-year horizons,
respectively. Overall, these residential energy efficiency investments have a negative rate of return across all reasonable time
horizons. [36]

An alternative method to summarize the return on WAP energy efficiency investments is to estimate the cost per ton of CO 2
avoided. This is calculated as the ratio of the net cost of the investments (i.e., the annual rental cost of the upfront investment less
the value of annual energy savings and avoided damages from regional pollutants) and the tons of CO 2 emissions reduced a year.
Panel D uses a 3% discount rate to calculate the annual rental
cost of capital, while Panel E uses 7%. Both panels report results

35. This is lower than the average gas recovery charge reported by the utility in
regulatory proceedings over the postweatherization period ($5.54), but the utility’s
recovery charge rolls in contract positions.
36. An alternative approach would be to calculate the social internal rate of
return from the government’s perspective. This would require accounting for the
social cost of public funds and the administrative costs of the program.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1637

based on assumptions of 10-, 16-, and 20-year life spans for the
investments and use wholesale energy prices as above.
As in Panels A through C, the conclusions differ depending
on whether one uses projected or realized energy savings. Using
projected energy savings values generated by the NEAT program
audits and the 16-year life span, the cost per ton of CO 2 avoided
is $38 with a 3% discount rate. With these estimates, the energy
efficiency investments would break even, from a social perspective, because the abatement cost per ton is approximately equal
to the U.S. government’s official value of the social cost of carbon
of $38.
However, the estimates that are based on actual energy savings again tell a different story. When the experimental estimates
of actual natural gas and electricity savings are used in column
(2), the analogous costs per ton of CO 2 avoided are $201 (3% discount rate) and $285 (7% discount rate). These costs exceed the
U.S. government’s social cost of carbon by a significant margin.
On the basis of the costs and benefits we account for here, these
residential energy efficiency investments are not a cost-effective
approach to mitigating climate change.

*VI.B. What Explains the Low Rate of Return on These Efficiency*
*Investments?*

It is natural to ask why the returns to residential energy efficiency investments are so low. After all, WAP contractors only implement measures with projected savings to costs ratios greater
than one. Section V.C found that the low returns cannot be explained by a rebound effect, and this subsection examines other
potential explanations with the aim of shedding light on whether
these findings are externally valid to other settings.
One possibility is that the costs of the investments are inflated in the government-funded WAP program, especially relative to costs in a private market, where most households make
energy efficiency investments. Online Appendix Tables A.8 and
A.9 compare the costs of four common measures in our data with
costs incurred by homeowners participating in two residential
audit-based energy efficiency programs administered by the Wisconsin Energy Conservation Corporation (WECC), analyzed by
Allcott and Greenstone (2017). The WECC program is a standard
residential audit-based energy efficiency program, so it seems reasonable to presume that most of its consumers have incomes that
exceed the WAP threshold. The clear conclusion from these tables


-----

1638 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

is that even after adjustment for observables, costs were statistically lower by an economically meaningful amount under WAP for
three of the four measures and roughly equivalent for the fourth
measure. One can speculate on the reasons, but the data fail to
support the possibility that the costs used to calculate the rate of
return associated with WAP measures are inflated. The analysis
is described in greater detail in the Online Appendix.
Another potential explanation is that contractor quality is low
in the WAP program and that this was particularly the case during
the Great Recession when WAP greatly increased its scale, making the article’s results unrepresentative of returns under more
normal conditions. We note that ARRA funding faced tremendous
scrutiny for mismanagement, and during this period WAP agencies indicated an increased commitment to training, monitoring,
and quality assurance. Furthermore, it is possible that the quality
of contractors could either increase or decrease during this period
because, while WAP was scaling up, the home construction industry was declining dramatically, potentially increasing the supply
of skilled contractors.
This is ultimately an empirical question, so the Online Appendix investigates the possibility that realized savings vary with
contractor experience. More precisely, we test for systematic variation in realization rates (i.e., the share of projected savings that
manifest as actual savings). The Online Appendix describes this
exercise in detail, including some important data limitations, but
the key finding is that we fail to find any relationship between
realization rates and our imperfect measure of contractor experience in the WAP program (see Online Appendix Figure A.1).
Based on the available data, it appears that contractor heterogeneity cannot explain the low rates of return to energy efficiency
investments through the WAP program.
Given that the data reject large rebound effects, and we find
no evidence that costs incurred in this government program were
abnormally high, we believe that the most likely explanation is
that the NEAT efficiency audit tool systematically overstates the
real returns to these investments by a significant margin. [37] It is

37. Another possibility is that the winters we analyze were warmer than the
average winter that was used in the engineering calculations. In fact, the opposite
is true in this period: we observe colder than average temperatures and higher
than average degree day measures in our sample that should lead to greater than
average savings.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1639

noteworthy that we found in our data that the NEAT program predicts baseline natural gas consumption that exceeds actual consumption by more than 25% prior to weatherization, suggesting
that the auditing tool could be underestimating homes’ efficiency
properties prior to weatherization. This might help explain why
the benefits of efficiency measures are overstated. [38] Furthermore,
recent research (e.g., Davis, Fuchs, and Gertler 2014; Levinson
2016; Allcott and Greenstone 2017) has also found low realization
rates for energy efficiency measures in other settings. Ultimately,
we do not have a definitive explanation for why the engineering
models overstate the savings, but we note that this is not an industry where there is a culture of objective ex post evaluation
and that contracts are not written with penalties for a failure to
deliver promised returns. Regardless of the cause, it seems clear
that significant research into improving the functioning of the
NEAT efficiency auditing tool (and similar tools) is warranted as
it is used by state and local WAP subgrantees, utility companies,
and home energy audit firms. [39]

More broadly, it is possible that the conventional cost-benefit
approach to these programs misses important nonenergy benefits and that such benefits help explain the popularity of energy
efficiency programs and investments. The most oft-cited example is that weatherization leads to improvements in health, presumably due to decreasing thermal stress. The Department of
Energy produced an evaluation of the weatherization program,
and claim that the retrofits produce substantial health benefits
(Oak Ridge National Laboratory 2015). Among other things, the
analysis claims that the typical WAP retrofit leads to an astounding almost $5,000 of mortality reduction benefits. We investigated
this claim and found that it is based on replies to the survey
question, “In the past 12 months, has anyone in the household
needed medical attention because your home was too cold (hot)?”

38. Several studies and utility reports have documented how software-based
energy analysis of existing homes tends to overpredict preretrofit energy use. For
example, a recent report found that modeling software consistently overestimated
energy consumption; mean modeled total annual use was 40% greater than billed
use (SBW 2012).
39. Although more sophisticated building simulation models exist, they are
also likely more expensive to use. An appeal of NEAT is that it can be inexpensively
used by the thousand of implementers who have a wide range of skills and technical
training. In fact, the DOE cites NEAT’s accessibility to nontechnical users as one
of its primary benefits (EERE 2010).


-----

1640 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

A series of assumptions are invoked to map these responses to
fatality rates. The estimates were also derived from a nonstandard statistical technique and included no effort to assess statistical significance. [40] Finally, the DOE’s own analysis of nonenergy
benefits fails to account for any health costs associated with the
documented increases in radon and formaldehyde levels (Pigg
et al. 2014), both of which are known health risks. Based on the
available evidence, particularly the small change in indoor temperature that we document (and which are confirmed by the DOE
study), we find little reason to believe that the nonenergy benefits
are important and some suggestion that they are negative.
It is possible that the weatherization retrofits improve the
quality of the house in ways beyond energy savings and the nonenergy benefits discussed in the previous paragraph. These quality
improvements could be reflected in the property markets through
higher house valuations. A prime example is new windows, which
are easily visible, can improve a house’s aesthetics, and are frequently undertaken as part of retrofits by non–low-income households. However, the program’s requirement that each investment
pass a cost-benefit test rules out windows in most cases, because
their energy savings generally fall short of their costs. At the same
time, this is an immature area and more research is necessary to
understand how housing markets capitalize energy efficiency investments.

VII. C ONCLUSION

We conducted a large-scale randomized-encouragement design experiment on a sample of 30,000 households presumptively
eligible for participation in WAP in the state of Michigan. Approximately one quarter of these households were randomly assigned
to a treatment group that was encouraged to apply for the program and received significant application assistance. The control
households were free to apply for WAP but were not contacted or
assisted in any way by our team. We also analyze corroborating
evidence from a quasi-experimental analysis covering over twice
as many weatherizations as well as a survey of indoor conditions
at weatherized and unweatherized homes.

40. We provide a more detailed explanation of the unconventional approach
taken to generate what we believe to be unrealistic estimates of nonenergy
[benefits. This summary can be found at https://energyathaas.wordpress.com/](https://energyathaas.wordpress.com/2015/10/06/weatherization-assistance-program/)
[2015/10/06/weatherization-assistance-program/.](https://energyathaas.wordpress.com/2015/10/06/weatherization-assistance-program/)


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1641

We document three primary findings. First, the aggressive
encouragement efforts were disappointing. This encouragement
increased take-up rates from less than 1% in the control group
to about 6% at a cost of over $1,000 per weatherized household.
Second, we find that WAP participation reduced energy consumption by 10–20% among participating households. However, the
upfront cost of the energy efficiency investments are about twice
the cost of the realized energy savings. Furthermore, the projected
savings are more than three times the actual savings. Third, while
the modest energy savings might be attributed to the rebound effect, when demand for energy end uses increases as a result of
greater efficiency, the article fails to find evidence of economically or statistically significant increases in indoor temperature
at weatherized homes.
Overall, the energy efficiency investments we evaluate are
poor performers on average across a variety of metrics. From
a household’s perspective, the annual internal rate of return
that would rationalize these efficiency investments is −2.3%. The
household’s perspective differs from society’s because it fails to
recognize the benefits of greenhouse gas and local pollutant emissions reductions and because the retail prices for natural gas and
electricity exceed their marginal costs of delivery. Accounting for
these two factors, the annual social internal rate of return that
would justify these investments is −7.8%, which is even less favorable. Finally, we also calculate the average cost per ton of avoided
CO 2 under a range of assumptions. The most plausible estimates
exceed $200/ton, which is significantly larger than the U.S. government’s estimate of the monetized benefits of avoided emissions
(i.e., the social cost of carbon) of roughly $38.
This study demonstrates that the returns to common residential energy efficiency investments are negative privately and
socially among low-income households in Michigan. The results
are striking because Michigan’s cold winters and the likelihood
that the weatherized homes were not in perfect condition suggests that it may have been reasonable to expect high returns in
this setting. Regardless of one’s priors, this article underscores
that it is critical to develop a body of credible evidence on the true
(rather than projected) returns to energy efficiency investments
in the residential and other sectors. The findings also suggest that
the past several decades may have seen too much investigation
into the why of the energy efficiency gap and not enough into
whether there really was one.


-----

1642 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

From a policy perspective, WAP does not appear to pass a conventional cost-benefit test, although its full set of goals may not
be reflected in such tests. On the broader question of optimal climate change policy, this article’s findings indicate that residential
energy efficiency retrofits are unlikely to provide the least expensive carbon reductions. Future research should examine whether
the real-world returns to energy efficiency investments differ so
starkly from engineering projections in other settings.

U NIVERSITY OF C ALIFORNIA, B ERKELEY, AND N ATIONAL B UREAU OF
E CONOMIC R ESEARCH

U NIVERSITY OF C HICAGO AND N ATIONAL B UREAU OF E CONOMIC R E 
SEARCH
H AAS S CHOOL OF B USINESS, U NIVERSITY OF C ALIFORNIA, B ERKELEY,

AND N ATIONAL B UREAU OF E CONOMIC R ESEARCH

S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL

An Online Appendix for this article can be found at *[The](https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-lookup/doi/10.7910/DVN/OJFYSR/qje/qjy005#supplementary-data)*
*[Quarterly Journal of Economics](https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-lookup/doi/10.7910/DVN/OJFYSR/qje/qjy005#supplementary-data)* online. Data and code replicating tables and figures in this article can be found in Fowlie,
Greenstone, and Wolfram (2018), in the Harvard Dataverse,
[doi:10.7910/DVN/OJFYSR.](http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.7910/DVN/OJFYSR)

R EFERENCES

Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone, “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?,”
*Journal of Economic Perspectives*, 26 (2012), 3–28.
———, “Measuring the Welfare Effects of Residential Energy Efficiency Programs,” Mimeo, 2017.
Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin, “Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” *Journal of the American Statistical As-*
*sociation*, 91 (1996), 444–455.
Barbose, Galen L., Charles A. Goldman, Ian M. Hoffman, and Megan A. Billingsley,
“The Future of Utility Customer-Funded Energy Efficiency Programs in the
United States: Projected Spending and Savings to 2025,” *Energy Efficiency*
*Journal*, 6 (2013), 475–493.
Callaway, Duncan, Meredith Fowlie, and Gavin McCormick, “Location, Location,
Location: The Variable Value of Renewable Energy and Demand-Side Efficiency Resources,” EIH Working Paper no. 264, 2015.
CPUC, “2010 to 2012 Energy Efficiency Annual Progress Evaluation Report,” Technical Report, California Public Utilities Commission, 2015.
Davis, Lucas, Alan Fuchs, and Paul Gertler, “Cash for Coolers: Evaluating a LargeScale Appliance Replacement Program in Mexico,” *American Economic Jour-*
*nal: Economic Policy*, 6 (2014), 207–238.
Davis, Lucas, and Erich Muehlegger, “Do Americans Consume Too Little Natural
Gas? An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing,” *RAND Journal of Eco-*
*nomics*, 41 (2010), 791–810.


-----

*ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS* 1643

Dubin, Jeffrey A., Alen K. Miedema, and Ram V. Chandran, “Price Effects of
Energy-Efficient Technologies: A Study of Residential Demand for Heating
and Cooling,” *RAND Journal of Economics*, 17 (1986), 310–325.
Dyson, Mark, Samuel Borgeson, Tabone Michaelangelo, and Duncan Callaway,
“Using Smart Meter Data to Estimate Demand Response Potential, With
Application to Solar Energy Integration,” *Energy Policy*, 73 (2014), 607–619.
EERE, “Review of Selected Home Energy Auditing Tools: In Support of the Development of a National Building Performance Assessment and Rating Program,”
Technical Report, U.S. Department of Energy, 2010.
EIA, “Natural Gas Monthly,” Technical Report, Energy Information Administration, 2015.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram, “Are the NonMonetary Costs of Energy Efficiency Investments Large? Understanding Low
Take-Up of a Free Energy Efficiency Program,” *American Economic Review*
*Papers and Proceedings*, 105 (2015), 201–204.
———, “Replication Data for: ‘Do Energy Efficiency Investments Deliver? Evidence
from the Weatherization Assistance Program’,” *Harvard Dataverse*, (2018),
doi:10.7910/DVN/OJFYSR.
Friedman, David, “Cold Houses in Warm Climates and Vice Versa: A Paradox of
Rational Heating,” *Journal of Political Economy*, 95 (1987), 1089–1097.
Gerarden, Todd D., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins, “Assessing The
Energy-Efficiency Gap,” Technical Report, Harvard Environmental Economics
Program, 2015.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew J. Kotchen, David S. Rapson, and Gernot Wagner,
“Energy Policy: The Rebound Effect Is Overplayed,” *Nature*, 493 (2013), 475–
476.
Gillingham, Kenneth, and Karen Palmer, “Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap:
Policy Insights from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence,” *Review of*
*Environmental Economics and Policy*, 8 (2014), 18–38.
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton, “Developing a Social
Cost of Carbon for US Regulatory Analysis: A Methodology and Interpretation,” *Review of Environmental Economics and Policy*, 7 (2013), 23–46.
Heckman, James J., Sergio Urzua, and Edward Vytlacil, “Understanding Instrumental Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity,” *Review of*
*Economics and Statistics*, 88 (2006), 389–432.
IEA, “Redrawing the Energy-Climate Map,” Technical Report, International
Energy Agency, 2013.
Jacobsen, Grant D., and Matthew J. Kotchen, “Are Building Codes Effective at
Saving Energy? Evidence from Residential Billing Data in Florida,” *Review of*
*Economics and Statistics*, 95 (2013), 34–49.
Joskow, Paul L., and Donald B. Marron, “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost?
Evidence from Utility Conservation Programs,” *Energy Journal*, 13 (1992),
41–74.
Kotchen, Matthew J., “Longer-Run Evidence on Whether Building Energy Codes
Reduce Residential Energy Consumption,” *Journal of the Association of Envi-*
*ronmental and Resource Economists*, 4 (2017), 135–153.
Kushler, Martin, Seth Nowak, and Patti Witte, “A National Survey of State Policies and Practices for the Evaluation of Ratepayer-Funded Energy Efficiency
Programs,” Technical Report U122, American Council for an Energy-Efficient
Economy, 2012.
Levinson, Arik, “How Much Energy Do Building Energy Codes Save? Evidence from California Houses,” *American Economic Review*, 106 (2016),
2867–2894.
Loftus, Peter J., Armond M. Cohen, Jame C. S. Long, and Jesse D. Jenkins, “A
Critical Review of Global Decarbonization Scenarios: What Do They Tell Us
about Feasibility?,” *Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change*, 6 (2015),
93–112.


-----

1644 *THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS*

McKinsey & Company, “Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy,” Technical Report, McKinsey Global Energy and Materials, 2009.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and Kevin A. Hassett, “Measuring the Energy Savings from
Home Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data,” *Re-*
*view of Economics and Statistics*, 81 (1999), 516–528.
Muller, Nicholas, and Robert Mendelsohn, “Efficient Pollution Regulation: Getting
the Prices Right,” *American Economic Review*, 99 (2009), 1714–1739.
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, *Weatherization Works—Summary of Findings*
*from the Retrospective Evaluation of the U.S. DOE’s Weatherization Assistance*
*Program* (Washington, DC: Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy,
Department of Energy, 2015).
Pigg, Scott, Dan Cautley, Paul Francisco, Beth Hawkins, and Terry Brennan,
*Weatherization and Indoor Air Quality: Measured Impacts in Single-family*
*Homes under the Weatherization Assistance Program* (Oak Ridge, TN: Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, 2014).
Radnofsky, Louise, “A Stimulus Project Gets All Caulked Up,” *Wall Street Journal*,
September 21, 2010.
SBW, “2010–2012 PGE and SCE Whole House Retrofit Program Process Evaluation Study,” Technical Report, 2012.
Schwarz, Peter M., and Thomas N. Taylor, “Cold Hands, Warm Hearth? Climate,
Net Takeback, and Household Comfort,” *Energy Journal*, 16 (1995), 41–54.
Thorpe, David, *Energy Management in Buildings: The Earthscan Expert Guide*
(Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2013).
U.S. Census Bureau, *“American Community Survey (ACS),”* ( Three-Year Public
Use Sample (PUMS), 2007–2011.


-----

