### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x
# Climate change beliefs and their correlates in Latin America


Received: 12 October 2022

Accepted: 20 October 2023

Check for updates

#### Matias Spektor 1, Guilherme N. Fasolin 2 & Juliana Camargo 1
### The ability of climate skeptics to block climate action depends on prevailing beliefs among the public. Research in advanced democracies has shown skepticism about the existence, the causes, and the consequences of climate change to be associated with socio-demographic features and political ideol- ogy. Yet, little is known about climate-related beliefs elsewhere. We address this gap by mapping beliefs in climate change and their correlates in Latin America. We show skepticism over the existence and anthropogenic origins of climate change to be limited, but identify a high number of skeptics around the severity of its consequences. Furthermore, we show skepticism to be corre- lated with psychological rather than socio-political factors: individualistic worldviews in particular drive disbelief in the severe consequences of climate change, a worrying finding in contexts where social trust is low. These findings offer a starting point for better addressing the constraining effects of climate skepticism in the Global South.


Climate skepticism has driven scholars to investigate the range of
factors influencing public perceptions of climate change [1][,][2] . Research
suggests that political ideology and demography play an outsized role
in shaping people’s beliefs about climate change, when compared to
other social and psychological factors [3][,][4] . However, since the bulk of
existing work focuses on advanced democracies like United States [5][,][6],
the United Kingdom [7][,][8], Germany [9], and Australia [10], the question
remains so to whether similar patterns occur in the developing world [11] .
In the case of Latin America, home to some of the most diverse
and threatened biomes on the planet, the study of climate psychology
has focused on climate change concern [12] and climate risk perception [13]

rather than climate change beliefs, defined as propositional cognitions
about the existence, causes, and consequences of climate change. A
single study has inspected the factors associated with the belief in the
anthropogenic origins of climate change, but not the critical question
of beliefs in its existence and its consequences [14] . Other studies have
explored the effect of country-level variables (e.g., prosperity and
democracy) on climate change beliefs, but not the individual-level
variables shaping such public perceptions [15][,][16] . These limitations are
compounded by the fact that these studies draw on general surveys
that lack dedicated climate sections in their questionnaires (e.g., The
Gallup World Poll, Latinobarometer, and Latin American Public


Opinion Project), leaving out a range of theoretically relevant
individual-level variables.

This gap in knowledge is problematic because public beliefs in
climate change condition climate action [17][,][18], and Latin America is likely
to be disproportionately affected by climate change [19] . Understanding
the factors that are associated with public perceptions of climate
change in developing countries [20][–][22] is necessary if scholars and policy
makers are to be able to mount effective strategies to push back
against climate skepticism [23] and tailor effective communication strategies to promote positive change in the context of the current climate
crisis.

Here, we test the individual-level factors that shape people’s
perceptions of the existence, the anthropogenic causes, and the severe
consequences of climate change, three different but complementary
mental constructs that scholars have shown to constitute climate
change beliefs [24][–][26] . By fielding surveys to nationally diverse samples in
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and Mexico
(N = 5338), we are able to study a group of countries that account for
more than 80% of regional carbon emissions in Latin America. We
investigate key factors that previous literatures have shown to correlate with climate change beliefs. We first test the role for political
ideology, a variable known to matter across advanced


1 School of International Relations, Fundação Getulio Vargas, Avenida Paulista 542, São Paulo 01310-000, Brazil. 2 Department of Political Science, Vanderbilt
University, 230 Appleton PI, Nashville, TN 37203, USA. [e-mail: matias.spektor@fgv.br](mailto:matias.spektor@fgv.br)

Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 1


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


democracies [24][,][27][,][28] . We then turn to socio-demographic variables such
as sex, age, education, religion, income, and race, correlates which
previous studies have shown to be relevant in some settings but no
others [3][,][29] . In addition, we test psychological variables such as individualism and egalitarianism worldviews, which previous literature has
found to be impactful globally [27] but not in Latin America [14] . We also
assess the New Ecological Paradigm (NEP), a set of values that is
strongly associated with climate change perceptions in countries as
diverse as U.S., China, Germany and, Netherlands [30][–][32] . Finally, in order
to ensure the comparability between our findings and other important
works in the field, we assess the association between climate change
beliefs and other psychological factors theorized as antecedents of
climate change perceptions, namely; objective [33] and subjective [34]

knowledge, trust in scientists [35], scientific consensus [36], and personal
experience of extreme weather events [37][,][38] .
## Results

The overwhelming majority of people in Latin America perceive climate change to be happening (over 90% in all countries) (Supplementary Fig. 1) as a result of human activity (93% on average)
(Supplementary Fig. 3). Yet, public opinion in the region is more
divided about the severity of its consequences (an average of 65% of
respondents believe climate change’s impact to be negative) (Supplementary Fig. 5). The remainder of this section summarizes our
findings about the association between political and sociodemographic and psychological variables with beliefs about the existence, origins, and consequences of climate change. Supplementary
Tables 1 and 4 present mean and standard deviations within each
dependent and independent variable across the sample, while Supplementary Tables 2 and 6 display a summary of correlations among
the measures in this study.

A. Psychological variables

0.14 [ 0.08, 0.21]

Subjective knowledge

0.16 [ 0.09, 0.24]

Objective knowledge

0.49 [ 0.35, 0.62]

Scientific consensus

#### Belief in the existence of climate change

Considering Latin America as a whole, psychological factors are the
most associated with belief in the existence of climate change. The
strongest correlate is perceived scientific consensus (respondents
who hold this perception scored, on average, 0.49 points more on
the climate change existence scale (0-8) than those who do not,
holding all else constant (p-value < 0.01)), followed by NEP (β = 0.305,
p-value < 0.01) and personal experience with extreme weather events
(β = 0.232, p-value < 0.01) (Supplementary Table 12, column viii).
These results are consistent across almost all countries at the 5%

significance level (Supplementary Table 12, columns i to vii). However, these results should be taken cautiously because we find the
reliability of the NEP scale to be low (α = 0.53 fails to meet the conventional 0.60 criterion for an acceptable Cronbach’s alpha).
Other psychological antecedents matter to a lesser extent (Fig. 1).
For example, at the regional level belief in the existence of climate
change has a positive correlation with people’s subjective and objective knowledge (β = 0.140, p-value < 0.01 and β = 0.165, p-value < 0.01,
respectively) (Supplementary Table 12, column viii). Yet, at the country
level subjective knowledge is only statistically significant in Ecuador,
Mexico, and Peru (Supplementary Table 12, columns v, vi and vii) and
objective knowledge is only statistically significant in Colombia,
Ecuador and Peru (Supplementary Table 12, columns iv, v and vii).
Furthermore, Latin Americans who trust scientists tend to believe climate change is happening more than those who do not, a positive
association that we only observe for the overall sample at the 10%
significance level (Supplementary Table 12, column viii). In addition,
we find a positive association between egalitarian values and belief in
the existence of climate change but it is small in magnitude and weakly
consistent across countries (β = 0.067, p-value < 0.05, Supplementary
Table 12, column viii). Finally, we find no statistically significant

B. Political ideology and
Socio−Demographic variables

0.02 [−0.05, 0.09]

Political ideology: Left

0.10 [ 0.04, 0.16]

Political ideology: Progressive

0.01 [−0.06, 0.07]

Female

0.01 [−0.08, 0.11]

Education: High school or equivalent

0.03 [−0.07, 0.13]

Education: Undergraduate or more

0.01 [−0.13, 0.16]

Religion: Catholic

0.14 [−0.08, 0.35]


Religion: Evangelical Pentecostal or other evangelical

Religion: Evangelical Traditional

Religion: Others/No Relig.

Income: 1 − 2 minimum wages

Income: 2 − 3 minimum wages

Income: 3 − 5 minimum wages

Income: 5 − 10 minimum wages

Income: 10 minimum wages or more

Income: Do not know/ Prefer to not answer

Age (Years)


0.09 [−0.09, 0.26]

0.00 [−0.15, 0.16]

0.12 [ 0.03, 0.21]

0.00 [−0.12, 0.12]

−0.04 [−0.17, 0.09]

0.01 [−0.15, 0.17]

0.04 [−0.09, 0.18]

0.03 [−0.09, 0.15]

0.00 [ 0.00, 0.00]


Trust in scientists

The New Ecological Paradigm (NEP)

Individualism worldview

Egalitarianism worldview


0.12 [−0.02, 0.27]

0.31 [ 0.21, 0.40]

−0.02 [−0.07, 0.03]

0.07 [ 0.01, 0.13]


0.23 [ 0.12, 0.35]
Personal experience (extreme weather events)

−0.50 −0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50

Estimate


Fig. 1 | Correlates of Belief in the Existence of Climate Change in Latin America.
Results from an ordinary least squares model regressing climate change existence
on a set of independent variables (A) and socio-demographic characteristics (B).
Respondents from all countries (n = 2887 observations) are included in the model.
For each independent variable, point estimates of the coefficients and confidence
intervals, in brackets, are reported. Coefficients are changes in the climate change


−0.24 [−0.44,−0.03]
Race: Black

−0.50 −0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50

Estimate

existence scale (i.e., 0–8) given a unit increase in the covariates. The higher the
scale, the greater the confidence that climate change is happening. The width of the
confidence intervals for each coefficient is 95% with heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors. Reference baseline for Education is “Elementary (Primary) or less”,
Religion is “Atheist” and Income is “0–1 minimum wages”.


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 2


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


correlation between holding individualistic worldviews and belief in
the reality of climate change. This result is consistent across countries.
Turning to socio-political factors, we find that political ideology is
weakly associated with the belief in the existence of climate change in
the overwhelming majority of countries (Fig. 1). We define political
ideology alongside right-left and conservative-progressive scales
which highlight contrasting individual beliefs over social and political
change (see Methods). Taken as a whole, participants who self-identify
as progressives tend to express less skepticism about the existence of
climate change than their conservative co-nationals (β = 0.102,
p-value < 0.05, Supplementary Table 12, column viii). At the country
level, however, the relationship is statistically significant only for Brazil
and Chile (Supplementary Table 12, columns ii and iii). Furthermore,
results show that the left-right divide has no statistically significant
correlation with the belief in the existence of climate change
(β = 0.019, p-value > 0.1, Supplementary Table 12, column viii).
Socio-demographic variables too are weak correlates of the perception that climate change is happening (Fig. 1). For instance, when
comparing respondents with no formal schooling or primary education to those with secondary (e.g., high school) and post-secondary
education (e.g., undergraduate), there is not significant difference in
their likelihood of believing in the existence of climate change. In
addition, age (in years) fails to be a significant factor, as each additional
year of age is not associated with a stronger belief in the reality of
climate change. Moreover, our findings indicate that an increase in
income, measured by each additional increment in minimum wages
(ranging from 1 to 10 or more), is not correlated to a higher likelihood
of believing in climate change. Similarly, the results demonstrate that
female participants are not less likely to be skeptical about the existence of climate change than male co-nationals, dispelling any genderbased skepticism about this issue. These results hold regardless of our

A. Psychological variables

0.00 [−0.01, 0.02]

Subjective knowledge

0.05 [ 0.03, 0.08]

Objective knowledge

0.07 [ 0.03, 0.11]

Scientific consensus

0.06 [ 0.00, 0.11]

Trust in scientists

0.05 [ 0.02, 0.07]

The New Ecological Paradigm (NEP)

−0.04 [−0.05,−0.02]

Individualism worldview

0.01 [−0.01, 0.03]

Egalitarianism worldview

0.01 [−0.01, 0.04]
Personal experience (extreme weather events)

−0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1

Estimate

Fig. 2 | Correlates of Belief in the Anthropogenic Causes of Climate Change in
Latin America. Results from an ordinary least squares (linear probability) model
regressing the perception of climate change anthropogenic causes on a set of
independent variables (A) and socio-demographic characteristics (B). Respondents
from all countries (n = 2,883 observations) are included in the model. For each

independent variable, point estimates of the coefficients and confidence intervals,


estimation approach (Supplementary Tables 25 and 26, column i). This
said, race seems to be a potentially relevant factor: Fig. 1 reveals that
black Latin Americans are more skeptical about the reality of climate
change than their non-black co-nationals. We read these results cautiously, however, because the negative association is statistically significant in Argentina alone (Supplementary Table 12, column i).
#### Belief in anthropogenic climate change

Figure 2 displays the main correlates of the belief that human activity is
the major cause of climate change. Among the psychological variables,
individualistic worldviews stand out as the only negative, statistically
significant correlate of skepticism about the anthropogenic origins of
climate change. Considering Latin America as a whole, a one-unit
increase in the individualistic values scale is associated, on average,
with a reductionof 3.8 percentage points in the probability of believing
in the anthropogenic nature of climate change (p-value < 0.01). With
the exception of Ecuador and Mexico, the association is statistically
significant across the board (Supplementary Table 13, columns v
and vi).
Other psychological variables are positively associated with the
belief in the anthropogenic nature of climate change: objective
knowledge (β = 0.054, p-value < 0.01), perceived scientific consensus
(β = 0.070, p-value < 0.01), and trust in scientists (β = 0.056,
p-value < 0.05) (Supplementary Table 13, column viii). However,
results are not consistent across all countries. Furthermore, endorsement of the NEP scale is positively correlated with belief in
anthropogenic climate change in the entire sample (β = 0.045,
p-value < 0.01, Supplementary Table 13, column viii), although we
recall that the low internal validity of this scale prevents us from
making reliable inferences. Overall, in terms of magnitude, these
psychological variables have similar correlation coefficients with the

B. Political ideology and
Socio−Demographic variables

0.01 [−0.01, 0.04]

Political ideology: Left

−0.03 [−0.05, 0.00]

Political ideology: Progressive

0.00 [−0.02, 0.02]

Female

0.04 [ 0.01, 0.07]

Education: High school or equivalent

0.06 [ 0.03, 0.09]

Education: Undergraduate or more

0.00 [−0.03, 0.03]

Religion: Catholic

−0.08 [−0.16, 0.00]

Religion: Evangelical Pentecostal or other evangelical

0.03 [−0.01, 0.07]

Religion: Evangelical Traditional

−0.01 [−0.05, 0.02]

Religion: Others/No Relig.

0.01 [−0.02, 0.04]

Income: 1 − 2 minimum wages

0.02 [−0.02, 0.05]

Income: 2 − 3 minimum wages

0.00 [−0.04, 0.04]

Income: 3 − 5 minimum wages

0.00 [−0.05, 0.04]

Income: 5 − 10 minimum wages

0.01 [−0.03, 0.05]

Income: 10 minimum wages or more

0.01 [−0.03, 0.04]

Income: Do not know/ Prefer to not answer

0.00 [ 0.00, 0.00]

Age (Years)

−0.01 [−0.06, 0.05]
Race: Black

−0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1

Estimate

in brackets, are reported. Coefficients multiplied by one hundred are percentage
point changes in the probability of believing climate change is mainly caused by
human activity given a unit increase in the covariates. The width of the confidence
intervals for each coefficient is 95% with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
Reference baseline for Education is “Elementary (Primary) or less”, Religion is
“Atheist” and Income is “0–1 minimum wages”.


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 3


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


perception of anthropogenic climate change in the model including
all countries in the sample. The linear combination assessment of
coefficients reveals they are not significantly different from each
other at the 5% level and, thus, no psychological variable has a
stronger association than the others (Supplementary Table 23).
We find political ideology to be weakly associated with skepticism
about the anthropogenic origins of climate change (Fig. 2). The positive association between left-right and anthropogenic climate change
is not statistically significant when we estimate our model for Latin
America as a whole (β = 0.015, p-value > 0.1), (Supplementary Table 13,
column viii). Analyzing each country separately, only Ecuador and
Mexico have a positive statistically significant association between
these variables (β = 0.072, p-value < 0.1 and β = 0.068, p-value < 0.05,
respectively) (Supplementary Table 13, columns v and vii). We find that
progressivism (as compared to conservatism) is negatively associated
with skepticism in anthropogenic climate change (β = −0.025,
p-value < 0.05) (Supplementary Table 13, column viii). The association
is not statistically significant in 6 out of the 7 participating countries
(Supplementary Table 13, columns i, ii, iv, v, vi and vii).
Finally, results show socio-demographic variables to be weakly
correlated with the belief in anthropogenic climate change. For
example, we find that sex, religion, income, age and race are not statistically correlated with the belief that climate change is caused by
humans (Fig. 2). The exception—albeit one that is weakly uniform
across countries—is our finding that more highly educated respondents are less skeptical about the causal role of human activity in
causing climate change (Supplementary Table 13, column viii).
#### Belief in the consequences of climate change

Among the set of psychological variables, individualistic worldviews
has one of the strongest and statistically significant associations with

A. Psychological variables

0.01 [−0.02, 0.04]

Subjective knowledge

0.07 [ 0.04, 0.10]

Objective knowledge

0.06 [ 0.01, 0.11]

Scientific consensus

0.04 [−0.03, 0.11]

Trust in scientists

0.08 [ 0.04, 0.12]

The New Ecological Paradigm (NEP)

−0.11 [−0.14,−0.09]

Individualism worldview

0.00 [−0.03, 0.04]

Egalitarianism worldview

0.05 [−0.01, 0.10]
Personal experience (extreme weather events)

−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2

Estimate

Fig. 3 | Correlates of Belief in the Consequences of Climate Change in Latin
America. Results from an ordinary least squares (linear probability) model
regressing the perception of climate change consequences on a set of independent
variables (A) and socio-demographic characteristics (B). Respondents from all
countries (n = 2887 observations) are included in the model. For each independent
variable, point estimates of the coefficients and confidence intervals, in brackets,


beliefs about the consequences of climate change: people who score
higher on individualistic values tend to see climate change’s impact as
less negative than their co-nationals who score lower on that scale
(Fig. 3). Specifically, considering the participating countries as a whole,
a one-unit increase in the individualistic value scale is associated, on
average, with an 11.5 percentage points (p-value < 0.01) reduction in
the probability of an individual believing climate change will have
negative impacts. This relationship is statistically significant, similar in
size, and consistent across all countries in the sample (Supplementary
Table 14, columns i through vii), suggesting that individualistic values
shape public perceptions of climate impact across the region.
We find that objective knowledge also correlates with the perception of the consequences of climate change. Our analysis of the
entire sample shows that the perception of more negative impacts of
climate change is positively and statistically significantly associated
with objective knowledge (β = 0.067, p-value < 0.01, Supplementary
Table 14, column viii), a result observed in 4 out of the 7 countries in
the sample (Supplementary Table 14, columns i, ii, iv and vii). While
similar in magnitude, the relationships of other psychological variables
are more heterogeneous across countries. For example, considering
our sample as a whole, perceived scientific consensus has a positive
and statistically significant association with belief in the severity of
climate change (β = 0.062, p-value < 0.05, Supplementary Table 14,
column viii), but, analyzing each country separately, it is statistically
significant only for Chile (Supplementary Table 14, column iii). Furthermore, when assessing the entire sample, the association between
the NEP scale and the perception of serious consequences is positive
and statistically significant (β = 0.081, p-value < 0.01, Supplementary
Table 14, column viii), but once again we take these results with caution
due to our concerns about the scale’s reliability. Finally, we find that at
the 5% significance level, subjective knowledge, trust in scientists,

B. Political ideology and
Socio−Demographic variables

0.08 [ 0.05, 0.12]

Political ideology: Left

0.01 [−0.03, 0.05]

Political ideology: Progressive

−0.03 [−0.07, 0.01]

Female

0.08 [ 0.03, 0.13]

Education: High school or equivalent

0.15 [ 0.09, 0.20]

Education: Undergraduate or more

−0.07 [−0.13, 0.00]

Religion: Catholic

−0.16 [−0.26,−0.05]

Religion: Evangelical Pentecostal or other evangelical

−0.08 [−0.17, 0.00]

Religion: Evangelical Traditional

−0.06 [−0.13, 0.01]

Religion: Others/No Relig.

0.06 [ 0.00, 0.12]

Income: 1 − 2 minimum wages

0.08 [ 0.02, 0.15]

Income: 2 − 3 minimum wages

0.07 [ 0.01, 0.13]

Income: 3 − 5 minimum wages

0.07 [−0.01, 0.15]

Income: 5 − 10 minimum wages

0.08 [ 0.01, 0.15]

Income: 10 minimum wages or more

0.01 [−0.05, 0.07]

Income: Do not know/ Prefer to not answer

0.00 [ 0.00, 0.00]

Age (Years)

0.05 [−0.04, 0.13]
Race: Black

−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2

Estimate

are reported. Coefficients multiplied by one hundred are percentage point changes
in the probability of believing climate change consequences will be negative given a

unit increase in the covariates. The width of the confidence intervals for each

coefficient is 95% with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Reference baseline for Education is “Elementary (Primary) or less”, Religion is “Atheist” and Income
is “0–1 minimum wages”.


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 4


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


perceived personal experience with extreme weather events, and
egalitarian values do not show a statistically significant association
with the perception of climate change impacts (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 14, column viii).
Furthermore, results for the entire region show the association
between political ideology and perceptions of climate change impact
to be positive and statistically significant (Fig. 3). Specifically, we find
that individuals on the left are more likely to perceive the impact of
climate change as negative comparted to their co-nationals on the
right (β = 0.085, p-value < 0.01) (Supplementary Table 14, column viii).
Yet, at the country level, we find this relationship to be statistically
significant only in 3 out of the 7 countries surveyed (Supplementary
Table 14, columns ii, ii, and vi). In addition, we find no statistically
significant association between conservatism and skepticism about
the impact of climate change (p-value > 0.1) (Fig. 3).
Last but not least, the analysis of socio-demographic variables
reveals two patterns (Fig. 3). First, education is the most consistent
demographic correlate of perceived impacts of climate change. We
find that individuals with secondary education (e.g., high school or
equivalent), and particularly those with undergraduate education, are
less doubtful about the negative impacts of climate change compared
to individuals with only primary education or no formal education,
suggesting that level of education may moderate the individual’s
ability to concretize the effects of climate change (Supplementary
Table 14, column viii). Second, in terms of statistical significance,
demographic variables such as age, sex, race, income, and religion
either have a moderate relationship with the perceived impacts of
climate change or none at all. In a minority of countries, we find religious denominations such as Catholic, Evangelical Pentecostal, and
Evangelical traditional to be associated with minimizing the severity of
climate change (Supplementary Table 14, columns iii, iv and vii).
## Discussion

This study presents unique data on the individual-level factors that
shape climate change perceptions in Latin America. Overall, mass
publics across the region are highly concerned about climate change.
We find only limited room for skepticism over the existence of climate
change or its anthropogenic origins, but identify a high number of
skeptics around the severity of its consequences. These results raise
questions as to what factors might be behind these trends. We identify
psychological variables—particularly individualistic values—as the
most influential correlates of climate skepticism across the region,
while we find political ideology and socio-demographic factors not to
be as impactful. Taken together, these findings underscore the relevance of psychological factors in understanding climate change perceptions in Latin America and hold significant implications for the
crafting of effective pro-climate communication strategies aimed at
populations across this region of the Global South.
In the present study, individualistic values are the most powerful
determinant of climate skepticism over the origins and consequences
of climate change, but not its existence. These findings challenge
previous literatures, which found no role for individualistic worldviews
on the human origins of climate change in Latin America [14] . Furthermore, our results offer novel evidence that such worldviews are correlated with public perceptions of climate change consequences, an
association of high political salience due to the known links between
individual-level perceptions about the consequences of climate
change and support for climate action [32] .
There are theoretical and empirical reasons for the outsized role
of individualistic values as a driver of climate skepticism. Theoretically,
it has been long established that people holding individualistic values
downplay the human causes and the severity of climate change, since
acknowledging them would demand changes in personal lifestyles that
individualistic people typically resist [39] . Furthermore, research has
shown that people holding more individualistic values are inclined to


minimize climate risk scenarios because accepting them could lead to
limitations on activities they tend to strongly support, such as commerce, industry, and free enterprise [40] . Since members of the public
ranking high on individualistic values tend to be motivated reasoners [41]

(i.e., they are more likely to seek out information that reinforces their
existing beliefs), an important question rising from this study that
future research could explore is how best to persuade them to
recognize the severity of climate change without triggering
backlash [42][,][43] .

Empirically, the outsized role of individualistic values as determinant of climate skepticism mirrors wider social trends in Latin
America. The region has seen a surge in independent self-construal,
personal autonomy, self-expression, and achievement orientation,
trends that may be contributing to the activation and intensification of
individualism over reliance on state institutions [44] . Furthermore, Latin
America has experienced rapid erosion in levels of social trust [45],
meaning the decline of dense community interactions around shared
norms [46] . This erosion may in turn reinforce individualistic tendencies,
as people become less likely to rely on collective action and institutions than on their own resources to resolve social problems. Future
research could empirically test these ideas, in particular the relationship between social trust and individualistic values in shaping climaterelated attitudes [47] .

Our finding that individualistic values do not correlate with the
belief in the existence of climate change also requires explanation.
Although the present study cannot adjudicate why this is the case,
existing theoretical literatures provide useful foundations for a tentative interpretation. We know that beliefs in the causes and consequences of climate change can highlight the need for mitigation and
adaptation policies more intensely than the belief in the mere existence of climate change, thereby raising the prospect of government
intervention to cope with the effects of climate change [34] . In turn, this
may trigger a negative reaction from highly individualistic people, who
normally push back against big-government intrusion in their way of
life [48] . These findings are consistent with new literature suggesting that
climate skeptics are intuitively aware of the distinct dimensions of
climate change beliefs, and have intentionally ceased to target belief in
the existence of climate change (where scientific evidence is plentiful
and increasingly hard to rebuke), questioning instead its human causes
and the severity of its consequences [23][,][32] .
Two other psychological factors in this study also play a role in
shaping climate change perceptions, although their influence proved
to be limited and inconsistent across the sample: scientific consensus
and objective knowledge. Scientific consensus is the most influential
correlate of the belief in the existence of climate change, but it weakly
correlates with beliefs in causes and consequences. One plausible
explanation is that in the low-trust societies of Latin America the perception of consensus among the scientific community might in itself
be reassuring, counterbalancing personal doubts about the credibility
of climate science. It remains unclear, however, why this same logic
does not apply to beliefs in causes and consequences. The lack of
correlation between scientific consensus and beliefs on causes and

consequences therefore casts a shadow of doubt on the notion
established in existing literatures that scientific consensus should be
seen as a ‘gateway belief’ that opens the door to other related beliefs,
such as the anthropogenic causes and worrisome consequences of
climate change [49][,][50] . Furthermore, it is worth noting that while scientific
consensus in our study somewhat shapes beliefs in climate change,
trust in scientists does not. The lack of association may indicate that
people view consensus among scientists as more tangible evidence of
the truth of climate change, compared to more abstract notions of
trustworthiness.

Objective knowledge in this study is significant across all dimensions of climate change beliefs, albeit in a minority of sampled countries. This result confirms previous research showing positive


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 5


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


relationships between climate beliefs and objective knowledge [34] . It
also dovetails with existing literature noting that domain-specific
knowledge is more useful than subjective knowledge measures in
explaining climate change perceptions [51] . Although the effect of
objective knowledge on beliefs varies across countries, investing in
climate communication centered around it may be valuable to
increase levels of belief in the existence, causes and consequences of
climate change and, by implication, facilitating climate-friendly policies support and behavioral change [52] .
Other psychological variables in this study only had small or null
impact in shaping climate change perceptions. For example, subjective
knowledge, a factor that ranks consistently high in other studies on
climate change perceptions, exhibited significant variation in our
study on Latin America [27] . Moreover, mirroring empirical research
conducted in the Global North [53], we found limited and inconsistent
associations between personal experience with extreme weather
events and climate change beliefs. Overall, these heterogeneous
results suggest that climate change beliefs in Latin America may be
associated with a unique set of variables, in line with existing multicountries studies on the topic [13][,][15] . A proper examination of climate
change dynamics in the region requires more within-case studies and
in-depth comparisons to understand why these factors vary crossnationally. Future research should explore the contextual factors that
contribute to differences in individual-level effects and their interac
tion with country-level conditions to explain these variations.
Political ideology and socio-demographic variables have limited
influence on climate change perceptions in our sample. Unlike it is the
case in the US [27][,][54] and Western Europe [55], in Latin America the divide
between climate change skeptics and non-skeptics is not primarily
driven by political ideology. Instead, the pattern here is more similar to
findings from Central and Eastern Europe [56], where political cleavages
play a minor role in shaping climate change perceptions. One possible
explanation is that people in less developed countries find it hard to
see climate change through the prism of left-right or progressiveconservative divides, since the issue has been mostly restricted to
intra-elite debates due to its relatively low salience compared to other
pressing social problems [57] . These results bode well for the emergence
of broad pro-climate coalitions in Latin America, since pro-climate
action can garner public support from individuals across the political

spectrum.
Our study also found weak associations between sociodemographic factors and perceptions of climate change. This result
contradicts the theoretical literature suggesting that younger, more
educated, higher income, and female individuals are less likely to be
climate skeptics [29] . Empirically, the results also diverge from findings
from the U.S [58] . and Western Europe (and to a lesser extent Eastern
Europe) [3], where demographics are important factors shaping climate
change beliefs. The limited effects of certain demographic variables
(e.g., education and sex) even differ from findings from other developing areas of the world, in particular Africa, where education and
gender are important correlates of the belief in anthropogenic climate
change [59] . Although future research needs to investigate what explains
the weak socio-demographic associations in Latin America, these
results highlight that demographic factors can carry different meanings in different contexts, with important implications for understanding beliefs about climate change. Finally, we are confident that
our results are not driven by our convenience sample, as they align
with studies using nationally representative samples in Latin America
to assess other climate dimensions such as climate risk perception [13]

and climate change concern [12] .
Taken together, these results about the determinants of climate
change beliefs can potentially help improve communication strategies
aimed at promoting climate action. Although our findings only allow
us to be speculative, existing theories in the scholarly literature can
illuminate the path forward. First and foremost, since beliefs in Latin


America in anthropogenic climate change and its consequences are
influenced by individualistic values, messages are likely to be more
effective when they are respectful of these values and align with these
types of motivations [60] . For example, one strategy might be to advance
climate solutions by highlighting the economic benefits (e.g., promoting green jobs) that arise from fighting climate change [61] . Emphasizing benefits may be particularly effective in garnering support for
pro-environmental action not only because individualistic people are
more likely to embrace solutions consistent with pro-market values,
but also because these solutions help address broader development
challenges in Latin America.
Second, the sources of pro-climate messages can play an important role in providing effective communication to the general public.
Since individualistic people tend to be more influenced by their ingroup, calls for climate action coming from in-group members should
be prioritized at the expense of messages coming from sources who
emphasize collective action and the common good [62][,][63] . This may
include pro-climate messages coming from sources that are not typically seen as environment-friendly but who have in recent years
nonetheless become invested in good governance in the climate
sphere (e.g., bankers, business leaders, agribusiness). Future research
should explore the effects of such voices on the public in general and
on those members of the public who rank high in individualistic values
and tend to exhibit a strong disdain or mistrust towards government
interventions. Research to date in this field has been scant and primarily centered on advanced democracies alone.
Third, tailored communication techniques that leverage scientific
consensus around the existence of climate change may nudge mass
publics to engage in pro-climate action. While the existing literature
emphasizes the positive downstream influence of scientific consensus
on climate-friendly policies and behavior [64], the challenge lies in
effectively conveying this consensus to the public in societies characterized by low literacy rates and limited access to information on
climate change. Across Latin America, the costs of accessing information are high and climate change is not politically salient. Taking
these factors into account, communicating the existence of scientific
consensus should be done through media that is easily accessible and
seen as largely reliable, as it is the case of radio and television [65] . As
recent research has shown, if communicators using these media were
to be able to show how individuals can contribute to solving the climate challenge, their messages may help drive public climate action
(e.g., voting, donating, protesting) [66] .
Last but not least, the current study is not without limitations.
First, the cross-sectional nature of this analysis does not allow for the
identification of causal relationships between variables, and there may
be endogenous relationships that were not accounted for. Further
research using experimental designs is necessary to establish causality
and fully explore the implications of the findings presented here.
Second, we acknowledge that our definition of individualistic values as
personal attitudes towards the role of government in society is narrow,
even if it is widely used in the field [4][,][67] . Many other aspects of this
complex construct may influence climate change perceptions. Future
studies should therefore explore broader conceptualizations of individualistic values, such as the extent to which individuals prioritize
their personal interests over the interests of society as a whole. This
approach may shed valuable light on the specific psychological
mechanisms that underlie the relationship between individualism and
climate skepticism, as well as inform the development of more targeted interventions to promote pro-climate behaviors. Third, drawing
on the insight from the present study that individual perceptions of the
role of government in society shape climate change beliefs, future
work should explore the role of ideological liberalism, adding an extra
layer to the study of political orientations in climate psychology.
Fourth, our finding showing that personal experience with extreme
weather is weakly associated with climate change beliefs may result


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 6


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


from the fact that our question did not attribute weather events to
climate change. As noted in Supplementary Information, we have
some reason to believe individuals make this attribution intuitively in
Latin America, but future work should follow recent research [68] and
explicitly test the consistency of these results.
In conclusion, this study has shed light on the correlates of climate
change perceptions in Latin America. Now, armed with a clearer
understanding of the variables associated with climate change perceptions in the region, pro-climate actors can develop more effective
policies, strategies, and campaigns to confront climate skepticism
head-on, a crucial step towards mitigating the impacts of climate
change and promoting a more sustainable future. Ultimately, by
building upon the findings of this study and continuing to investigate
the correlates of climate change perceptions in diverse contexts, we
can deepen our understanding of the social and psychological processes that shape beliefs not only in this particular region but across
the Global South.
## Methods
#### Participants

The study included nationally diverse participants from seven Latin
American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,
Peru, and Mexico), surveyed by the Netquest, an internet polling
company, between October and November 2021. Together, these
countries account for over 80% of greenhouse gas emissions (GHF) in
Latin America. Netquest builds its online panels through an opt-in
recruitment method, where respondents are randomly selected for
survey invitation, using population quotas to produce nationally
diverse samples. Netquest is certified with ISO 26362, an
international high-quality standard for online panels, and complies
with the European Society for Opinion and Market Research
(ESOMAR). In general, this means that Netquest engages in a number
of quality control steps, including the exclusion of speeders or
preventing duplicate responders. Additional information on data
quality and sampling is available in Netquest technical information
reports [69] .
We chose Netquest because it provides comprehensive national
panels in Latin America, which allow us to relatively approximate the
national representativeness of the participating countries. In this
study, respondents were recruited to match the demographic composition (e.g., quotas), particularly of sex, age, and education, laid
out by the national census of each country surveyed. The final sample
comprises 5400 participants, with all respondents above 18 years of
age. Each country surveyed had roughly 830 respondents. The only
exception was Ecuador, where just 421 respondents were interviewed
due to panel coverage constraints. For demographic information
broken for each of the countries, see Supplementary Table 8. Overall,
the sample of each country is balanced with respect to sex and age,
approximating closely to their respective official statistics (Supplementary Table 11). Moreover, one main concern of online samples is
that their respondents tend to be more educated than the general
population, a tendency that can be exacerbated in both lower
and upper and middle-income countries [70] . In general terms, our
sample is well-distributed in terms of education, with the overrepresentation of educated participants more pronounced in Ecuador and Peru (Supplementary Table 10). Nonetheless, we are
cautious and all the models estimated in the study include sample
weights to adjust for sample representativeness. Finally, our country
samples are also broadly diverse in other important demographic
indicators, including race, religion, and income level (Supplementary
Table 8), which are known to correlate with important dimensions of
climate change perceptions. More generally, online surveys in Latin
America have been shown to by and large replicate results from
nationally representative samples [71], reinforcing the reliability of our
sample.

#### Materials

Questionnaires were first elaborated in Portuguese and then translated
into Spanish by a native speaker and taking into account translation/
back-translation procedures. Concerns about comprehension and
translatability were addressed by testing and piloting of questionnaires in all seven countries contemplated in the survey.
#### Dependent variable measures (climate change perceptions)

Building on previous research, we measure climate change perceptions along three theoretically distinct but complementary
dimensions [24][,][32] . The distinction is relevant because scholars have

shown individuals to hold inconsistent cognitions around the existence, the causes, and the consequences of climate change [32], and
evidence suggests each belief may be influenced by different
antecedents [32][,][34] . To measure belief in the existenceof climate change [17][[,][72]

participants were asked, “You may have heard the idea that the world’s
climate is changing due to increases in average temperatures over the
past 150 years. What’s your personal opinion on this? Do you think that
the world’s climate is changing?” Respondents could then choose one
of the following responses: “Yes (1), No (0), Don’t know.” Respondents
who answered “yes” or “no” were then asked: “How sure are you that
climate change is [not] happening?” (0 = not sure at all, 3 = extremely
sure). Responses to these questions were recoded to create an eightpoint certainty scale (0 = extremely sure global warming is not happening, 4 = don’t know, 8 = extremely sure global warming is happening). Belief in the anthropogenic causes of climate change was
assessed with the question, “Assuming climate change is happening,

”
do you think it is…. Respondents selected one of the four options:
“Caused mostly by human activities, Caused by human activities and
natural changes, Caused mostly by natural changes in the environment, Neither because global warming isn’t happening.” Following
standard practice, respondents who answered “caused mostly by
human activities” were coded as 1, while all others as 0 [31][,][73] . Finally, we
measure belief in the consequences of climate change with the standard
question used in the literature [3] : “How good or bad do you think the
impact of climate change will be on people across the world?” The
question was measured using an 11-point scale, ranging from 0
(extremely bad) to 10 (extremely good).
#### Independent variables

Knowledge about climate change was measured using one question
that embraces participants’ subjective perception of their own expertise (subjective knowledge), and another that focuses on respondents’
knowledge about the human causes of climate change (objective
knowledge). We measured subjective knowledge by asking respondents the following question: “How much do you feel you know about
climate change?” Participants rated their perceived amount of
knowledge on a four-point scale (1 = nothing, 2 = a little, 3 = a moderate
amount, 4 = a lot) but with a fifth option for people who “don’t know”.
Objective knowledge was measured by asking participants, “Indicate
whether you think each of the following is a major cause of climate

”
change, or not a cause at all. Six items were adopted from Guy et al. [34],
which include three true causes (“Pollution/emissions from business
and industry”, “People driving their cars”, “Destruction of tropical
forests”) and three false causes (“Use of aerosol spray cans”, “Use of
chemicals to destroy insect pests”, and “Nuclear power generation”).
Responses of items were coded as correct (1) or incorrect (0) and
summed to create a total score ranging from 0 to 6.
Beliefs about science were measured through a question about
scientific consensus around climate change (“consensus heuristic”),
and another about trust in scientists (“source heuristic”). These two
measures comprise the two main heuristics about science and climate
change thathavebeen implicated in the existing literature [27] . In the case
of scientific consensus about climate change, participants were asked,
“Which comes closest to your own view?” The response options were:


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 7


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


“Most scientists think global warming is happening”, “A lot of disagreement among scientists about whether or not global warming is
happening”, “Most scientists think global warming is not happening”,
and “I do not know enough to say.” Respondents who answered “Most
scientists think global warming is happening” were coded as 1, and all
other answers as 0 [73] . We measured trust in scientists by asking, “How
much do you trust scientists as a source of information about climate
change?” Participants rate their level of trust on a four-point scale (1 =
strongly distrust; 4 = strongly trust) [35] .
To measure environmental values, we used a 4-item revised version from the New Ecological Paradigm scale based on previous
research [74] . The items include “Humans are severely abusing the
environment”, “The so-called ‘ecological crisis’ facing humankind has
been greatly exaggerated”, “The earth is like a spaceship with very
limited room and resources”, and “If things continue on their present
course, we will soon experience a major ecological catastrophe.” Items
were responded to on a four-point scale (1 = strongly disagree; 4 =
strongly agree). There was also a fifth option for people who “don’t
know”. The participants who chose the “don’t know” option were
treated as missing values on this scale. The NEP scale was constructed
by taking the mean scores across these four items. The original scale
showed poor internal reliability across the whole sample (α = 0.37),
which a closer analysis revealed to be driven by the answers to the
second item, “The so-called ‘ecological crisis’ facing humankind has
been greatly exaggerated”. Consequently, we conducted the analyses
on the three positively worded items only, which makes the scale more
reliable. This said, NEP continues to carry limitations, given its alpha
(0.53) did not exceed the conventional 0.60 criteria. For this reason,
we suggest caution in interpreting the results based on the NEP scale.
Values were measured using the individualism and egalitarianism
cultural worldviews derived from cultural cognition theory. We follow
the standard definition of worldviews as mental constructs pertaining
to the role of the state in society rather than more expansive understandings of the relationship between individuals and society as a
whole [4][,][67][,][75] . We operationalized our individualism scale on the basis of
five items [76], including the following: “If the government spent less time
trying to fix everyone’s problems, we’d all be a lot better off”, “Our
government tries to do too many things for too many people. We
should just let people take care of themselves”, “The government
interferes too much in our everyday lives”, “Government regulation of
business usually does more harm than good”, and “People should be
allowed to make as much money as they can, even if it means some
make millions while others live in poverty.” All items were responded
to a four point-scale (1 = strongly disagree; 4 = strongly agree). The
individualism scale is constructed by taking the mean scores across
these 5 items, which together showed acceptable internal reliability
(α = 0.67). Note that the individualism scale has been reported in other
studies in the Global South with similar internal consistency, underscoring the reliability of this measure in our study [67] .
Egalitarianism worldview is also a composite measure based on
five items [76] . Items include: “The world would be a more peaceful place
if its wealth were divided more equally among nations,” “In my ideal
society, all basic needs (food, housing, health care, education) would
be guaranteed by the government for everyone,” “I support government programs to get rid of poverty,” “Discrimination against minorities is still a very serious problem in our society.” All items were
responded to a four point-scale (1 = strongly disagree; 4 = strongly
agree). As in the case of the individualism scale, the scale of egalitarianism was created by taking the mean scores across these five items.
The scale showed relatively strong internal reliability across the overall
sample (α = 0.72).
Personal experience with extreme weather events was assessed by
asking respondents to recall how often in the last five years they
experienced extreme weather events (e.g., severe heat waves,
droughts, freak storms, flooding etc.) while residing in their home


country. Following previous studies, items were measured on a fivepoint scale (1 = never, 2 = once, 3 = twice, 4 = more than three, 5 = can’t
remember) and responses were combined and dichotomized to form a
dummy describing personal experience (0 = no experience, 1 =
experience) [77] .
Political ideology was measured using two different questions.
First, respondents were asked to rate how right or left they are on a tenpoint scale (1 = left, 10 = right). Right-wing individuals generally
advocate for limited government intervention in the economy, and
traditional social values, while left-wing individuals typically support
government intervention to address economic inequality, social justice issues, and expanded social welfare programs. Second, respondents were asked to choose the option that better characterizes their
political values in a conservative-progressive dimension. The response
options were rated on a five-point scale (1 = very progressive, 5 = very
conservative). Conservatism can be defined as a political ideology that
advocates for traditional values, limited government intervention, and
the preservation of established institutions and social norms. By contrast, progressivism is a political ideology that promotes social and
political change, often through government intervention, to address
social injustices and improve the well-being of society. We opted to use
the word “progressive” rather than “liberal” because “liberal” in Latin
America can be associated with the orthodox economic policy preferences of the political right. “Progressive” (progresista in Spanish or
progressist in Portuguese) provides a better characterization of what
the existing literature labels as “liberal” in this context.
The demographic variables include sex (binary: male or female),
age (in years), education level (ordinal: elementary (primary) or less;
high school or equivalent; and undergraduate or more), religion
(Evangelical Christian/Traditional; Evangelical Protestant; Evangelical
Pentecostal; Evangelical Neo-Pentecostal; Other Evangelical denominations; Catholic; Kardecist/Spiritualist; Jewish; Agnostic; Atheist;
Other Religion.), race (White; Black or Pardo); Indigenous; Other. In all
countries (except for Brazil), we also include “Mestizo” as an option
choice, given that it is a racial classification present in these countries),
income-based on minimum wages (from 1 to 10 minimum wages
or more).
#### Statistical analysis

To evaluate what factors determine climate change beliefs in Latin
America we estimated the following equation by ordinary least squares
for each country and our whole sample:

y i = β 0 + Psychological Variables [0] i [γ][ + Political Ideology Variables] [0] i [α]

+ SocioDemographic Variables [0] i [μ][ +][ ε] i

ð1Þ

where y i is one of our three dependent variables (belief in the
existence of climate change, belief in the anthropogenic causes of
climate change, and belief in the consequences of climate change)
for individual i; Psychological Variables i is a vector of eight psychological variables of individual i; Political Ideology Variables i is a
vector of two political ideology variables of individual i; and
SocioDemographic Variables i is a vector of six population-related
characteristics of individual i. Reference baseline for education is

“elementary (primary) or less”, for religion is “atheist” and for
income is “0–1 minimum wages”. Standard errors presented in the
results are robust to heteroscedasticity and all estimations include
sample weights.
For belief in the existence of climate change, the vector of parameters of interest, γ, α and μ, can be interpreted as changes in the

–
climate change belief scale (0 8) given a unit increase in the covariates. For belief in the anthropogenic causes of climate change, each
parameter of the vectors γ, α and μ multiplied by one hundred can be
interpreted as percentage point changes in the probability of believing


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 8


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


climate change is mainly caused by human activity given a unit
increase in the binary covariates. For belief in the consequences of
climate change, γ, α and μ multiplied by one hundred can be interpreted as percentage point changes in the probability of believing
climate change impacts will be negative given a unit increase in the
binary covariates.
To gauge the robustness of our ordinary least squares estimates
we performed several tests by employing alternative methods to
estimate the parameters of our main equation. First, we estimated
three multilevel (hierarchical) models, one for each dependent variable, with a random intercept specified at the country-level (Supplementary Table 25). Second, we estimated three fixed-effects models,
one for each dependent variable, by including country-level effects
(Supplementary Table 26). Both of these approaches allow us to control for possible time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity between
respondents of each country. Third, we used an ordinal logistic model
to regress belief in the existence of climate change on the three vectors
of correlates (Supplementary Table 27). Finally, we estimated two
binary logistics models regressing the belief in the anthropogenic
causes of climate change and belief in the consequences of climate
change also on the three vectors (Supplementary Tables 28 and 29).
Overall, the results are substantially similar irrespective of the alternative specifications of our main equation.
#### Robustness checks

Besides employing alternative methods to estimate the parameters of
our main equation (see Methods section), several complementary tests
were performed to gauge the robustness of our findings. First, we
provide evidence of the absence of multicollinearity. Supplementary
Table 16 reveals that the variance inflation factor (VIF)—a measure of
the amount of multicollinearity in regression analysis—is low for all our
independent variables. All the VIPs are below 1.5, which relieves our
concern about the potential correlation between the main variables.
Second, even after finding correlation among the independent
variables to be low, we performed F-tests to mitigate concerns that the
independent variables might not be jointly statistically significant.
Supplementary Table 17 shows the results of the estimations of the
joint significance test for all the models we ran in the study, considering all independent variables. We find that all independent variables are jointly significant in each of the four main OLS models
estimated for the whole sample. We also ran the F-test of joint significance for different groups of independent variables separately

–
(Supplementary Tables 18 20). For each different group of independent variables, we found that they are jointly significant in each of the
four main OLS models estimated for the whole sample. These results
indicate the models fit the data well and suggest that the independent
variables included in the model are not irrelevant.

Finally, to attenuate concerns that some of our results might be
statistically significant by chance, we ran a Benjamini-Hochberg test to
adjust p-values for multiple hypothesis tests [78] . As shown in Supplementary Table 21, the overall results of the estimations using the
adjusted p-values corroborate the results using standard p-values. All
the statistical interpretations remain roughly the same, even after
accounting for the multiple hypothesis tests. This suggests that our
inferences about statistical significance are not an artifact of the
number of predictors in our regression models.
#### Ethics statement

This study was approved by the Ethical Review Committee of the
Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) (Ethics no. 053/2021). All participants
informed voluntary consent with an IRB-approved consent protocol
before being allowed to proceed to the full questionnaire. The survey
did not collect identifying information about respondents and/or use
any type of deception. The panel provider modestly compensated the


respondents with points they accumulate and then exchange for
goods or cellphone minutes.
#### Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
## Data availability

The processed data used in this study are available at the Harvard
Dataverse as Spektor, Matias; Fasolin, Guilherme; Camargo, Juliana,
2022, “Replication Data for: Climate Change Beliefs and their Corre[lates in Latin America”, https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/F4KNNS, Har-](https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/F4KNNS)
vard Dataverse, V2. The following software has been used to process
the data: the R software (version 4.2.2) The integrated development
environment (IDE) of choice was RStudio.
## Code availability

The code used in this study are available at the Harvard Dataverse as
Spektor, Matias; Fasolin, Guilherme; Camargo, Juliana, 2022, “Replication Data for: Climate Change Beliefs and their Correlates in Latin
America”, [https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/F4KNNS,](https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/F4KNNS) Harvard Dataverse, V2.
## References

1. Capstick, S. & Whitmarsh, L. Perceptions of climate change. In (eds
Clayton, S. & Manning, C.) Psychology and Climate Change: Human
Perceptions, Impacts, and Responses. 13–33 (Elsevier Academic
Press, 2018).
2. Clayton, S. et al. Psychological research and global climate change.
Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 640–646 (2015).
3. Poortinga, W., Whitmarsh, L., Steng, L., Bohm, G. & Fisher, S.
Climate change perceptions and their individual-level determinants: a cross-European analysis. Glob. Environ. Change 55,
25–35 (2019).
4. Hornsey, M. J. The role of worldviews in shaping how people
appraise climate change. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 42, 36–41 (2021).
5. Howe, P., Mildenberger, M., Marlon, J. & Leiserowitz, T. Geographic
variation in opinion on climate change at state and local scales in
the USA. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 569–503 (2015).
6. Leiserowitz, A. et al. Climate change in the American mind, September 2021. (Yale University and George Mason University. Yale
Program on Climate Change Communication, New Haven,
CT, 2021).
7. Capstick, S. B. & Pidgeon, N. F. What is climate change scepticism?
Examination of the concept using a mixed methods study of the UK
public. Glob. Environ. Change 24, 389–401 (2014).
8. Whitmarsh, L. Scepticism and uncertainty about climate change:
dimensions, determinants and change over time. Glob. Environ.
Change 21, 690–700 (2011).
9. Engels, A., Huther, O., Schafer, M. & Held, H. Public climate-change
scepticism, energy preferences and political participation. Glob.
Environ. Change 23, 1018–1027 (2013).
10. Leviston, Z., Leitch, A., Greenhill, M., Leonard, R. & Walker, I. Australians' Views of Climate Change (Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation, 2011).
11. Capstick, S., Whitmarsh, L., Poortinga, W., Pidgeon, N. & Upham, P.
International trends in public perceptions of climate change over
the past quarter century. WIREs Clim. Change 6, 35–61 (2015).
12. Lewis, G. B., Palm, R. & Feng, B. Cross-national variation in determinants of climate change concern. Environ. Politics 28,
793–821 (2019).
13. Lee, T. M., Markowitz, E. M., Howe, P. D., Ko, C. Y. & Leiserowitz, A. A.
Predictors of public climate change awareness and risk perception
around the world. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 1014–1020 (2015).


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 9


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


14. Hornsey, M. J., Harris, E. A. & Fielding, K. S. Relationships among
conspiratorial beliefs, conservatism and climate scepticism across
nations. Nat. Clim. Chang. 8, 614–620 (2018).
15. Levi, S. Country-level conditions like prosperity, democracy, and
regulatory culture predict individual climate change belief. Commun. Earth Environ. 2, 1–10 (2021).
16. Azócar, G. et al. Climate change perception, vulnerability, and
readiness: inter-country variability and emerging patterns in Latin
America. J. Environ. Stud. Sci. 11, 23–36 (2021).
17. Goldberg, M., Gustafson, A., Ballew, M., Rosenthal, S. & Leiserowitz,
A. Identifying the most important predictors of support for climate
policy in the United States. Behav. Public Policy 5, 480–502 (2021).
18. Spence, A., Poortinga, W., Butler, C. & Pidgeon, N. S. Perceptions of
climate change and willingness to save energy related to flood
experience. Nat. Clim. Chang. 1, 46–49 (2011).
19. IPCC. Summary for Policymakers (eds Pörtner, H.-O. et al.) in Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, USA, 2022).
20. Hopkins, D. Country comparisons. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 975 (2015).
21. Crona, B., Wutich, A., Brewis, A. & Garint, M. Perceptions of climate
change: linking local and global perceptions through a cultural
knowledge approach. Climatic Change 119, 519–531 (2013).
22. Editorial. Replication studies hold the key to generalization. Nat.
Commun. 13, 7004 (2022).
23. Hornsey, M. J. & Fielding, K. L. Understanding (and reducing) inaction on climate change. Soc. Issue Policy Rev. 14, 3–35 (2020).
24. Poortinga, W., Spence, A., Whitmarsh, L., Capstick, S. & Pidgeon, N.
F. Uncertain climate: an investigation into public scepticism about
anthropogenic climate change. Glob. Environ. Change 21,
1015–1024 (2011).
25. Heath, Y. & Gifford, R. Free-market ideology and environmental
degradation: the case of belief in global climate change. Environ.
Behav. 38, 48–71 (2006).
26. Bostrom, A. et al. Causal thinking and support for climate change
policies: International survey findings. Glob. Environ. Change 22,
210–222 (2012).
27. Hornsey, M. J., Harris, E. A., Bain, P. G. & Fielding,K. S. Meta-analyses
of the determinants and outcomes of belief in climate change. Nat.
Clim. Chang. 6, 622–626 (2016).
28. McCright, A. & Dunlap, R. E. The politization of climate change and
polarization in the American public’s views of global warming,
2001–2010. Sociological Q. 52, 155–194 (2011).
29. Milfont, T. L., Milojev, P., Greaves, L. M. & Sibley, C. G. Sociostructural and psychological foundations of climate change beliefs.
N.Z. J. Psychol. 44, 17–30 (2015).
30. Dunlap, R. E., Van Liere, K. D., Mertig, A. G. & Jones, R. E. Measuring
endorsement of the new ecological paradigm: a revised NEP scale.
J. Soc. Issues 56, 425–442 (2000).
31. Ziegler, A. Political orientation, environmental values, and climate
change beliefs and attitudes: an empirical cross-country analysis.
Energy Econ. 63, 144–153 (2017).
32. Van Valkengoed, A. M., Steg, L. & Perlaviciute, G. Development and
validation of a climate change perceptions scale. J. Environ. Psychol. 76, 101652 (2021).
33. Bord, R. J., O’Connor, R. E. & Fisher, A. In what sense does the public
need to understand global climate change? Public Underst. Sci. 9,
205–218 (2000).
34. Guy, S., Kashima, Y., Walker, I. & O’Neill, S. Investigating the effects
of knowledge and ideology on climate change beliefs. Eur. J. Soc.
Psychol. 44, 421–429 (2014).
35. Hmielowski, J. D., Feldman, L., Myers, T. A., Leiserowitz, A. & Maibach, E. An attack on science? Media use, trust in scientists, and


perceptions of global warming. Public Underst. Sci. 23,
866–883 (2014).
36. McCright, A. M., Dunlap, R. E. & Xiao, C. Perceived scientific
agreement and support for government action on climate change
in the USA. Climatic Change 119, 511–518 (2013).
37. Demski, C., Capstick, S., Pidgeon, N., Sposato, R. G. & Spence, A.
Experience of extreme weather affects climate change mitigation
and adaptation responses. Climatic Change 140, 149–64 (2017).
38. Myers, T. A., Maibach, E. W., Roser-Renouf, C., Akerlof, K. & Leiserowitz, A. A. The relationship between personal experience and
belief in the reality of global warming. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3,
343–347 (2013).
39. Kahan, D. Fixing the communication failure. Nature 463,
296–297 (2010).
40. Kahan, D. M. in Handbook of Risk Theory (eds Roeser, S. et al.)
725–759 (Springer, Dordrecht, 2012).
41. Kahan, D. M. et al. The Tragedy of the Risk-Perception Commons:
Culture Conflict, Rationality Conflict, and Climate Change. Temple
University Legal Studies Research Paper No. 2011-26 (2011).
42. Druckman, J. N. & McGrath, M. C. The evidence for motivated reasoning in climate change preference formation. Nat. Clim. Chang.
9, 111–119 (2019).
43. Bayes, R., Druckman, J. N., Goods, A. & Molden, D. C. When and how
different motives can drive motivated political reasoning. Political
Psychol. 41, 1031–1052 (2020).
44. Krys, K., Vignoles, V. L., de Almeida, I. & Uchida, Y. Outside the
“cultural binary”: understanding why latin american collectivist
societies foster independent selves. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 17,
1166–1187 (2022).
45. Keefer, P. & Scartascini, C. Trust: the key to social cohesion and
growth in Latin America and the Caribbean. Inter American Development Bank, (2022).
46. Fukuyama, F. Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. (Free Press, 1995).
47. Bodor, A., Varjú, V. & Grunhut, Z. The effect of trust on the various
dimensions of climate change attitudes. Sustainability 12,
1–19 (2020).
48. Kahan, D. M., Jenkins-Smith, H. & Braman, D. Cultural cognition of
scientific consensus. J. Risk Res. 14, 147–174 (2011).
49. Lewandowsky, S., Gignac, G. E. & Vaughan, S. The pivotal role of
perceived scientific consensus in acceptance of science. Nat. Clim.
Change 3, 399–404 (2013).
50. Cook, J. et al. Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of consensus
estimates on human-caused global warming. Environ. Res. Lett. 11,
048002 (2016).
51. Shi, J. et al. Knowledge as a driver of public perceptions about
climate change reassessed. Nat. Clim. Change 6, 759–762 (2016).
52. Ajzen, I., Joyce, N., Sheikh, S. & Cote, N. G. Knowledge and the
prediction of behavior: the role of information accuracy in the
theory of planned behavior. Basic Appl. Soc. Psychol. 33,
101–117 (2011).
53. Howe, P. D., Marlon, J. D., Mildenberger, M. & Shield, B. S. How will
climate change shape perceptions? Environ. Res. Lett. 14,
113001 (2019).
54. Campbell, E., Kotcher, J., Maibach, E., Rosenthal, S. & Leiserowitz,
A. Predicting the importance of global warming as a voting issue
among the registered voters in the United States. Curr. Res. Ecol.
Soc. Psychol. 2, 100008 (2021).
55. McCright, A. M., Dunlap, R. E. & Marquart-Pyatt, S. T. Political
ideology and views about climate change in the European Union.
Environ. Politics 25, 338–358 (2016).
56. Chaisty, P. & Whiteeld, S. Attitudes towards the environment: Are
post-communist societies (still) different? Environ. Politics 24,
598–616 (2015).


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 10


-----

### Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x


57. Zechmeister, E. & Corral, M. Individual and contextual constraints
on ideological labels in Latin America. Comp. Political Stud. 46,
675–701 (2013).
58. McCright, A. M. & Dunlap, R. E. Cool dudes: the denial of climate
change among conservative white males in the United States. Glob.
Environ. Change 24, 1163–1172 (2011).
59. Simpson, N. P. et al. ClimateChange Literacy Africa. Nat. Clim.
Chang. 11, 937–944 (2021).
60. Hornsey, M. J. & Lewandowsky, S. A toolkit for understanding
and addressing climate scepticism. Nat. Hum. Behav. 6,
1454–1464 (2022).
61. Bain, P. G. et al. Co-benefits of addressing climate change can
motivate action around the world. Nat. Clim. Change 6,
154–157 (2016).
62. Boon-Falleur, M. et al. Leveraging social cognition to promote
effective climate change mitigation. Nat. Clim. Chang. 12,
332–338 (2022).
63. Goldberg, M. H., Gustafson, A., Rosenthal, S. A. & Leiserowitz, A.
Shifting Republican views on climate change through targeted
advertising. Nat. Clim. Change 11, 573–577 (2021).
64. Bayes, R., Bolsen, T. & Druckman, J. N. A research agenda for climate change communication and public opinion: the role of scientific consensus messaging and beyond. Environ. Commun. 17,
16–34 (2020).
65. Goldberg, M. H. et al. The experience of consensus: video as an
effective medium to communicate scientific agreement on climate
change. Sci. Commun. 41, 659–673 (2019).
66. Doherty, K. & Webler, T. Social norms and efficacy beliefs drive the
Alarmed segment’s public-sphere climate actions. Nat. Clim.
Change 6, 879–884 (2016).
67. Thaker, J., Smith, N. & Leiserowitz, A. Global Warming Risk Perceptions in India. Risk Anal. 40, 2481–2897 (2020).
68. Ogunbode, C. A., Demski, C., Capstick, S. B. & Gennaro, R. Attribution matters: revisiting the link between extreme weather
experience and climate change mitigation responses. Glob.
Environ. Change 54, 31–39 (2019).
69. Netquest answers to ESOMAR 28 questions to help online research
buyers (Netquest, 2015).
[70. The World Bank. World Bank Country and Lend Groups. https://](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups#:~:text=For%20the%20current%202024%20fiscal,those%20with%20a%20GNI%20per)
[datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups#:~:text=For%20the%20current%202024%20fiscal,those%20with%20a%20GNI%20per)
[world-bank-country-and-lending-groups#:~:text=For%20the%](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups#:~:text=For%20the%20current%202024%20fiscal,those%20with%20a%20GNI%20per)
[20current%202024%20fiscal,those%20with%20a%20GNI%](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups#:~:text=For%20the%20current%202024%20fiscal,those%20with%20a%20GNI%20per)
[20per. (2023).](https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups#:~:text=For%20the%20current%202024%20fiscal,those%20with%20a%20GNI%20per)
71. Bush, S. S., & Clayton, A. Facing Gender: Gender and Climate
Change Attitudes Worldwide. Am. Political Sci. Rev. First View, 1–18
(Forthcoming).
72. Bergquist, P., Mildernberg, M. & Stokes, L. C. Combining climate,
economic, and social policy builds up support for climate action in
the US. Environ. Res. Lett. 15, 055019 (2020).
73. Howe, P., Mildenberger, M., Marlon, J. R. & Leiserowitz, A. Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local
scales in the USA. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 596–603 (2015).
74. Budescu, D., Por, H. H., Broomell, S. B. & Smithson, M. The interpretation of IPCC probabilistic statements around the world. Nat.
Clim. Chang. 4, 508–512 (2014).
75. Kahan, D. M. et al. The polarizing impact of science literacy and
numeracy on perceived climate change risks. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2,
732–735 (2012).


76. Leiserowitz, A. Climate change risk perception and policy preferences: the role of affect, imagery, and values. Climatic Change
77, 45–72 (2006).
77. Van der Linden, S. The social-psychological determinants of climate change risk perceptions: towards a comprehensive model. J.
Environ. Psychol. 41, 112–124 (2015).
78. Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc.:
Ser. B (Methodol.) 57, 289–300 (1995).
## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge support from the Applied
Research Network at FGV. M.S. would also like to thank Brazil’s

National Research Council for research support. We thank Renan
Chicarelli Marques and Vitória Totti Salgado for valuable research

assistance.
## Author contributions

M.S. and G.N.F. designed and fielded the survey. J.C. conducted the
statistical analyses. M.S. and G.N.F. wrote the final manuscript.
## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.
## Additional information

Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42729-x)

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Matias Spektor.

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Jack Zhou and

the other, anonymous, reviewers for their contribution to the peer review
of this work.

Reprints and permissions information is available at
[http://www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints)

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless

indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not

included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
[holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[licenses/by/4.0/.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

© The Author(s) 2023


Nature Communications |    (2023) 14:7241 11


-----

