## ARTICLE

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 **OPEN**
# Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials testing behavioural interventions to promote household action on climate change
### Claudia F. Nisa [1] *, Jocelyn J. Bélanger [1], Birga M. Schumpe [1] & Daiane G. Faller [2]

No consensus exists regarding which are the most effective mechanisms to promote

household action on climate change. We present a meta-analysis of randomised controlled

trials comprising 3,092,678 observations, which estimates the effects of behavioural

interventions holding other factors constant. Here we show that behavioural interventions

promote climate change mitigation to a very small degree while the intervention lasts (d =

−0.093 95% CI −0.160, −0.055), with no evidence of sustained positive effects once the

intervention ends. With the exception of recycling, most household mitigation behaviours

show a low behavioural plasticity. The intervention with the highest average effect size is

choice architecture (nudges) but this strategy has been tested in a limited number of

behaviours. Our results do not imply behavioural interventions are less effective than

alternative strategies such as financial incentives or regulations, nor exclude the possibility

that behavioural interventions could have stronger effects when used in combination with

alternative strategies.

1 Psychology Division, New York University Abu Dhabi, PO BOX 129188 Abu Dhabi, UAE. 2 Center for Global Sea Level Change, Research Institute, New York
[University Abu Dhabi, PO BOX 129188 Abu Dhabi, UAE. *email: cfn1@nyu.edu](mailto:cfn1@nyu.edu)

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 1


-----

## ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2


here is unequivocal consensus that we must reduce emissions to net-zero in the coming decades. Regarding lifestyle

T behaviour changes, pathways to curb global warming

require adopting energy-efficient appliances, reducing food waste,
reducing meat and dairy intake, and promoting energy-saving
behaviours, such as decreasing the use of air conditioning and
increasing the use of public transportation [1] . However, while there
is little controversy about the need to embrace these mitigation
strategies, no scientific agreement exists regarding which are the
most effective mechanisms to achieve it.
This paper examines which interventions are effective in promoting climate change mitigation by individuals and households,
and how effective efforts have been to date. We specifically
examine the impact of behavioural interventions—interventions

—
that do not involve economic (dis)incentives and regulations
holding all other factors constant. This is the specific focus of this
paper because there have been growing hopes for behavioural
interventions [2][,][3], such as consumption feedback, social comparison messages or tailored environmental appeals [4][–][6], as potential
(cost)effective alternatives to traditional market tools and regulations. There are several areas of consumer behaviour relevant
to climate change that are not typically targeted by governmental
legislation, e.g., meat and dairy eating habits, or food waste.
Moreover, market tools, such as price variations or subsidies,
have been shown less effective than expected to reduce electricity
demand [7] or to promote the consumption of renewable energies [8] .
In other areas, prices are not even used as an instrument to
influence consumers’ behaviour: the price of water at the consumer touchpoints is typically low, and penalties for not recycling
are largely inexistent. What is more, in some areas such as air
travel or consumption of animal products, market mechanisms
work against climate change mitigation, with prices decreasing
over time to incentivise demand [9] . Resulting from all the above,
behavioural interventions are gaining momentum as non-trivial
policy tools and represent an increasingly larger portion of the
action on climate change [2][–][4] .
The relative effectiveness of such interventions, nevertheless,
has not been carefully evaluated. There have been several
attempts to summarise evidence on this topic, including quantitative meta-analyses [10][–][14], but this previous work suffers from
substantive limitations. These limitations include estimating
behavioural effects from self-reported beliefs, attitudes or intentions, as well as combining estimates from observational and
experimental study designs, in addition to mixing artificial lab
evidence with real world behaviour. Such limitations pose severe
problems for impact evaluation. On the one hand, estimates from
quasi or non-experimental studies tend to be larger and are more
likely to be significant by comparison to estimates based on more
stringent experimental designs [15] . On the other hand, the gap
between attitudes and intentions reported in the lab, and realworld behaviour is well-documented [16], and similarly, the impact
of interventions on self-reported measures tends to be higher and
more likely to reach statistical significance compared to effects on
tangible behaviour [17] . Such biasing effects should not be underestimated. These may induce the perception that most common
interventions are effective, erroneously leading scholars and
policy makers to use the available (possibly inflated) estimates
as the basis for important predictions for climate change
mitigation [18] .
We address this gap by performing a large-scale meta-analysis
strictly based on randomised controlled field trials, measuring
factual changes in behaviour. The behaviours targeted are
essential to mitigate climate change and include household and
individual behaviours directly relevant to the production of
greenhouse gases emissions. The six included behaviours are as
follows. First, energy consumption in the home: within this


category we examined interventions that targeted electricity or
gas demand, purchase of energy-efficient appliances or consumption of renewable energy. Second, transportation: this
category includes the analysis of air travel, private car use, or
alternative options such as walking, cycling, or use of public
transportation. Changes in both energy and transportation
behaviours are deemed critical to achieve reductions in CO 2
emissions [18] . Third, consumption of animal products: interventions targeting reduced consumption or avoidance of meat and
dairy products. Recent estimates [19] highlight that, particularly in
developed countries, eating fewer animal products has a high
potential for carbon emissions reduction. Fourth, food waste:
interventions aiming to reduce the frequency or amount of food
wasted. Food waste is a vastly overlooked driver of climate
change. The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) quantified
the food wastage in terms of carbon footprint and concluded that
the contribution of food wastage emissions to global warming is
almost equivalent (87%) to global road transport emissions [20] .
Fifth, water consumption: interventions targeting the quantity of
water consumed including, for instance, time in shower or
laundry frequency. Household actions that consume the largest
amounts of water (showers and dishes/clothes washing) are also
actions that consume large amounts of energy, and thus saving
water saves energy (US Department of Energy) [21][,][22] . Sixth, recycling: includes both the reuse of natural resources, recycling of
plastic, paper or cans. Recycling contributes to reducing emissions from resource extraction, landfill methane and waste
incineration (US Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]) [23] .
The content of the interventions, that is, what strategy was
implemented to try to change behaviour, was not defined a priori
but was identified bottom-up from the literature. This allowed us
to understand what the predominant strategies are, opening a
window into the conceptual assumptions shared by practitioners
about what is expected to work.
Our work suggests that behavioural interventions, acting alone,
will provide little benefit to mitigate climate change. Results show
that most household behaviours relevant to mitigate climate
change exhibit resistance when targeted only by behavioural
interventions. In particular, critical actions such as the purchase
of energy-efficient appliances and private car use were barely
affected by the behavioural interventions examined. The most
promising types of interventions in terms of effectiveness are
choice architecture (nudges) and social comparison messages.
Information-based interventions, although the most common
strategies used to date, have very limited impact. Our results do
not prioritise regulatory and financial incentive-based policy
prescriptions above behavioural interventions, but suggest the
need to examine interactions between behavioural and nonbehavioural strategies.

Results
Descriptive statistics. The final sample according to our inclusion criteria comprised 83 studies, providing a total of 144 estimates. These estimates are unique, meaning that these originated
from independent datasets and controlled for same data/author
bias [24] . Included papers were published between 1976 and 2017,
and are fully described in Supplementary Data 1 and Supplementary References.
Table 1 summarises the main descriptive statistics and the
effect sizes estimated per key moderators. About 40% of the
papers targeted families, comprising a total of 724,792 households. The remaining interventions targeted discrete participants,
adding to a total of 2,367,886 individuals. Sample sizes were small
(≤100 per experimental arm) in more than half the papers. Only
about 13% of the papers reported a large, robust number of


2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications


-----

## NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 ARTICLE




observations (≥500 per experimental arm) but this small group of
papers correspond to over 90% of the total number of available
observations. Around 60% of the papers were based on selfselected samples, that is, studies in which participants opted-in or
explicitly consented to participate.
Regarding the duration of interventions, these ranged from a
single day (one-shot intervention) to 730 days (2 years).
Most interventions were short-lived, with mean duration 64 days
(SD = 140 days) and median 7 days. Half of the interventions
lasted up to 1 week, two-thirds lasted up to a month (67.4%) and
83.4% up to 3 months (Fig. 1).
In terms of geographical origin, roughly half of all studies were
conducted in the US/Canada, and about 30% were conducted in
European countries. With respect to the behaviour targeted, most
available estimates were related to energy consumption (36%; N =
30, 47 estimates), followed by transportation choices (23%; N = 20,
29 estimates), water use (23%; N = 19, 42 estimates), and recycling
(16%; N = 13, 23 estimates). There is a very limited number of
interventions targeting food waste and demand for livestock
products. For some behaviours, such as demand for air travel or
renewable energies, no randomised controlled trials (RCTs) using
behavioural interventions were identified.
Content-wise, there was a wide range of strategies used and, in
many cases, interventions implemented a bundle of experimental
stimuli, such as combining tips on how to save energy, making
appeals and reporting on neighbourhood behaviour. Based on
inter-judge agreement (see the “Methods” section), we propose a
categorisation that maximised the singularity of different
interventions, focusing on the key content of the materials
delivered to participants. Interventions used as main strategy one


of the following several possibilities. First, information: in this
category, interventions range from simple messages conveying
tips on how to save energy, in-home displays, energy labels or
statistics about climate change (N = 41, 53 estimates). Second,
appeals: here experimental stimuli are delivered under the form of
requests, pleas and appeals to change behaviour based on values
of humanity, cooperation and social responsibility (N = 9, 10
estimates). Third, engagement: interventions in this category try
to change psychological processes, such as promoting goalsetting, implementation intentions, commitment or engagement,
and mindfulness towards climate change mitigation (N = 33, 38
estimates). Fourth, social comparison: these interventions tend to
provide a comparative reference with respect to the mitigation
behaviours of close others, such as neighbours, colleagues/friends
or fellow citizens, based on principles of social influence and
social comparison (N = 22, 32 estimates). Lastly, choice architecture: usually designated as nudges [25], these interventions
influence behaviour by removing external barriers, expediting
access or facilitating climate change mitigation behaviours by
altering the structure of the environment in which people make
choices. Examples are putting recycling bins closer to regular
waste, reducing plate/glass size or setting air conditioning by
default to higher temperatures (N = 7, 11 estimates).

Behavioural interventions have small effects ceteris paribus.
Based on the criterion of statistical significance, behavioural
interventions promote climate change mitigation while the
intervention is in place (d = −0.093 95% CI −0.160, −0.055).
However, the aggregate magnitude of behavioural interventions is
very small. In reference to Cohen’s d [26], values below 0.1 tends to


NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3


-----

## ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

< 1 1 2 3 4 5–8 9–12 13–24               - 24

Intervention duration (weeks)

Fig. 1 Duration of the behavioural interventions in weeks. Shows the distribution of intervention duration according to the number of weeks from the
beginning to the conclusion of the experimental period


be interpreted as a very small effect, around 0.2 a small effect, 0.3

− –
0.4 a medium-small effect, 0.5 0.6 a medium effect, and 0.7 and
above a large effect.
We present all effect sizes d in combination with an additional
estimate of behavioural plasticity: probability of benefit (POB) [27] .
POB is the probability that the intervention will promote climate
change mitigation behaviours in the experimental group, by
comparison to the control no-intervention group. This estimate is
based on the magnitude of the effect size d (d/√2) [27] and provides a
more intuitive measure of impact. Overall, the expected POB from
behavioural interventions is 6.6%. This means that the probability
that a randomly selected individual in the experimental group
shows an improvement in mitigating climate change exceeding that
of a randomly selected individual in the control group is 6.6%.
However, there is high between-study heterogeneity [I [2] =
64.6% p < 0.001 [28] ], suggesting large variations in the effectiveness
of interventions according to moderator variables. Using metaregression models [29], we examined whether the duration of the
intervention could be a possible moderator of the overall effect
but results showed no significant effect (B = −0.001, p = 0.435).
We explored alternative sources of this heterogeneity, testing the
effect of sample type (households vs. individuals), sample size,
self-selection and geographical region (USA, Europe, and rest of
the world) (Table 1).
Both sample size and self-selection significantly explain the
variability found in the overall estimate. Restricting the calculation of the effect size to the more precise, robust estimates based
on studies with no self-selection bias or studies with large
samples, results show smaller average impacts (respectively, d =
−0.040 95% CI −0.103, −0.016; and d = −0.028 95% CI −0.106,
−0.006 I [2] ns). This adjustment estimates the aggregate POB
between 2% and 3%.
The fact that studies with small samples reported substantially
higher average effect sizes than papers with larger samples (d =
−0.335 vs. d ≤ −0.141, respectively) suggests small-study bias [30] .
Figure 2 visually displays the relationship between estimate
precision (based on standard errors) and the magnitude of the
effect reported. Estimates with lower standard errors tend to
cluster around a zero effect. This visual examination is statistically
confirmed by the Egger’s test [31], with a significant negative slope
(B = −0.0321, p < 0.001) indicating that the smaller the sample,


the stronger the effect size reported. This result would not pose a
problem if small sample studies were reporting low betweenstudy variance (I [2] < 40%). However, only the large sample studies
(N ≥ 500 per group) are estimating precise effect sizes for their
population (I [2] = 25.6% ns).
Moreover, cumulative effect sizes over time (cumulative metaanalysis) show a temporal profile of decreasing impact, from high
to medium effect sizes up to the early 1990s, to then mediumsmall effect sizes for the next two decades, and small to very small
effect sizes in approximately the last 10 years (Fig. 3). This
analysis suggests that the larger effects from smaller studies were
more characteristic several decades ago, whereas more recent
studies provide more conservative estimates.
With respect to sustained effects after the intervention is
concluded, 15 studies reported 21 estimates which measured if
any lasting changes could be identified. There is no evidence of a
durable positive impact (d = −0.13 95% CI −0.42, 0.28). The
follow-up period was on average 21 weeks (SD = 23.2 weeks)
with a median of 6.5 weeks. Meta-regression results show no
relationship between follow-up duration and the significance of
interventions in the longer term. Given that no sustained effects
were identified, the following analyses of impact per type of
behaviour and type of intervention are based on estimates while
the intervention is in place.

Most mitigation actions have low behavioural plasticity. Estimates for all examined behaviours tend to be low, with the
exception of recycling, which reaches a medium effect size (d =
−0.457 95% CI −0.595, −0.319 POB 32.3%). Interventions
promoting a reduction in energy consumption also have an
expected POB of 6.6% (d = −0.094 95% CI −0.133, −0.055).
Within the category of energy studies, we included studies targeting the purchase of energy-efficient appliances. The impact of
interventions to specifically influence these purchases is estimated
with precision (I [2] = 22.6% ns) as only marginally significant (d =
−0.036 95% CI −0.129, 0.058), with an estimated POB of 2.5%.
Interventions targeting transportation, including less private
car use and more public transportation, bicycle, and walking,
have a combined POB of 9.6% (d = −0.136 95% CI −0.183,
−0.089). However, combining all interventions targeting


4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications


-----

## NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 ARTICLE

0.0

0.5

1.0

–2 –1 0 1 2

Effect estimate

Fig. 2 Funnel plot displaying the relationship between estimate quality and effect size. Each dot represents a study (e.g. measuring the effect of a certain
behavioural intervention); the y-axis represents study precision (standard error) and the x-axis shows the study’s result (effect estimate). This scatterplot
is used for the visual detection of systematic heterogeneity between studies. It assumes that studies with high precision will be plotted near the average
(red line), and studies with low precision will be spread evenly on both sides of the average, creating a roughly funnel-shaped distribution. Deviation from
this shape suggest small-study bias, which is the case here, with lower precision studies reporting stronger effects

1976

1991

2011

2013

–1.6054 –0.068084

SMD

Fig. 3 Cumulative meta-analysis. In cumulative meta-analysis, the pooled estimate of the treatment effect is updated each time the result from a new study
is included. The circles in the plot represent the cumulative effect size at any given moment, that is, the average effect size resulting from the inclusion of
studies up to a certain point. This allows tracking the accumulation of evidence on the effect of behavioural interventions over time


transportation reveals highly heterogeneous estimates (I [2] =
98.4%) implying that very different effects are obtained for
different types of transportation modes. Isolating the impact for
decreasing private car use substantially reduces the POB to 2.5%


with an effect size close to zero (d = −0.036 95% CI −0.039,
−0.034). This is a statistically precise estimate (I [2] = 0%).
Attempts to reduce water consumption also show small effects
(d = −0.052 95% CI −0.079, −0.025). This category includes a


NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5


-----

## ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Fig. 4 Sample size per experimental group in behavioural interventions targeting different types of behaviour. Shows how different household mitigation

behaviours have been tested with interventions with a distinct number of observations


subset of papers examining how to reduce the use of multiple
towels by hotel guests. This subset of papers reports the highest
effect sizes (d = −0.168 95% CI −0.271, −0.064) within this
category with a POB of 11.9%. Removing these papers and
analysing the impact of interventions specifically to reduce daily
water use in households decreases the effect size to d = −0.028
(95% CI −0.046, −0.010) statistically homogeneous (I [2] = 19.5%
ns). This corresponds to a POB of 2%.
Interventions to reduce food waste and animal products
consumption have similar characteristics: limited number of
studies with low between-study heterogeneity (I [2] = 21.6% and
I [2] = 36.8% both ns), meaning that interventions targeting these
behaviours tend to report statistically similar effects. Although the
average magnitude of these effect sizes is higher compared to
energy, transportation or water, these are marginally significant
(food waste d = −0.231 95% CI −0.518, 0.056 POB 16.3%, and
animal products consumption d = −0.239 95% CI −2.81, −0.008
POB 16.9%).
Lastly, recycling seems to be the behaviour more susceptible to
change. Interventions aiming to increase recycling have, on
average, the strongest effect sizes (d = −0.457) although highly
heterogeneous (I [2] = 69.9%). Individuals targeted with behavioural interventions in this context are expected, on average,
to be about a third more likely to recycle than the individuals in
the control group.

Nudges and social comparison report the highest effects.
Information and social comparison are the most common strategies used in field experiments, both in terms of the number of
studies published as well as the quantity of people reached.
However, both show a very small impact. Information-based
strategies (e.g., statistics, in-home displays, factual feedback,
energy labels) has an expected POB of 3.4% (d = −0.048 95% CI
−0.075, −0.021). Strategies of social comparison, such as providing social references and peer comparisons, are slightly more
effective (d = −0.077 95% CI −0.108, −0.046; POB = 5.4%).
Nonetheless, both estimates are based on the largest RCTs
included in our sample, suggesting that consistent (small) effects
can be expected using these strategies, albeit seemingly more
consistent when using information than social comparison (I [2] =
34.7% vs. I [2] = 72.2%, respectively).
Appealing to the need for climate change mitigation or trying
to increase people’s engagement (either by goal-setting or


commitment to climate change mitigation) seem to produce
higher average effect sizes (d = −0.253 to d = −0.266). Some
caution is required, however, when interpreting these effects.
Studies employing these strategies tend to be composed mostly of
self-selected samples, which greatly inflates results. In particular,
commitment strategies require, by definition, that people accept
to commit to a goal, otherwise they are excluded from the study.
Therefore, such average effect sizes are much higher (d = −0.480;
POB 33.9%) than strategies that target the general population,
with various levels of commitment or interest in climate change
mitigation. Moreover, between-study heterogeneity is high both
in interventions using appeals and engagement (I [2] = 70.5% and
I [2] = 71.8% respectively).
The strongest effect is estimated for nudges or choice
architecture, which is not only the highest effect size (d =
−0.352; POB 25%) but also a robust calculation (I [2] = 0%), and
estimated from studies that tend to not rely on self-selected
participants. Being exposed to interventions based on choice
architecture increases the probability of mitigating climate change
in about a quarter.
Up to this point we have examined average effect sizes per
different moderator but many features co-occur between studies,
which increases uncertainty about the main influences of the effect.
While subgroup analysis does not establish causal effects, we
attempted to disentangle the potential role of different moderators
using a meta-regression model jointly testing all covariates,
including sample size, self-selection, type of behaviour and type of
intervention. The model [F(11,131) = 6.70 p < 0.01] showed that
sample size, the interventions social comparison and nudges, and
the behaviour recycling were the covariates explaining significant
variations in the effect sizes. In Figs. 4 and 5 we explore sample size
per behaviour and intervention. Energy, transportation and water
were the only behaviours examined in very large studies which may
explain the lowest effect sizes found (Fig. 4). Per intervention,
nudges were a strategy only tested in small sample studies, which in
turn may be related to its high effect size (Fig. 5).
The combined analysis of intervention per type of behaviour
(Fig. 6) suggests an alternative explanation for the low effect sizes
reported in energy and transportation, which could be attributed
to the dominant use of information-based interventions. Other
types of behaviours were also dominated by specific interventions,
such as nudges for reduced meat consumption, social comparison
for water saving, and psychological engagement, such as goal

6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications


-----

## NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 ARTICLE

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Fig. 5 Sample size per experimental group in behavioural interventions using different strategies. Shows how different behavioural stimuli have been tested

in interventions with a distinct number of observations

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Fig. 6 Type of intervention tested per mitigation behaviour. Shows how different mitigation behaviours have been targeted by distinct behavioural stimuli


setting, for recycling. The direction of causality is unclear, but
these features tend to be associated and future research should
unravel more precise sources of impact.

Discussion
Taken in isolation, behavioural interventions have a very small
positive effect on climate change mitigation behaviours while the
intervention is in place. Once the intervention stops, there is no
evidence that such interventions produce lasting positive changes.
While the intervention lasts, the small overall effect size corresponds to the probability of such interventions promoting mitigation behaviours in 6.6%. This general estimate is unadjusted to
several biases such as small samples and participant self-selection.
These two forms of bias were shown instrumental to inflate
average effect sizes. Restricting the analysis to more conservative
and precise estimates from large samples and naïve subjects, the
expected probability of change from behavioural interventions is
reduced to 2–3%.


Our work indicates alarmingly low levels of behavioural
plasticity: most household behaviours relevant to climate change
exhibit resistance when targeted only by behavioural interventions. In particular, critical actions such as purchase of energyefficient appliances and private car use were barely affected by the
behavioural interventions examined. We compare selected estimates with Dietz et al. [18], who also estimated the behavioural
plasticity of several similar behaviours. For instance, Dietz et al.
estimated that, under the most effective interventions, an 80%
behavioural plasticity could be achieved for the purchase of
energy-efficient appliances. We report an average null effect size.
For choices related to the private use of cars, Dietz et al.’s esti
–
mates are more conservative (15 25%) but still substantially
higher than ours (2.5%).
There are some key differences between our work and Dietz
et al. [18], which could account for these discrepancies. Firstly, Dietz
et al. included interventions also using financial incentives. The
discrepancies found may be due to a higher effectiveness of
financial incentives. However, there is no clear way to establish


NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7


-----

## ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2


this hypothesis because Dietz et al. did not specify which interventions were used, under which circumstances and for which
specific behaviours. Secondly, Dietz et al. based their estimates on
proxies and, in some cases, less stringent research designs. We
consider this an important difference compared to our methodological approach, which allowed us to estimate the behavioural
plasticity of tangible behaviour in natural experimental settings. It
is well-established that interventions based on non-experimental
studies tend to produce higher effect sizes [15][,][17] . Thirdly, Dietz
et al. based a significant part of their analysis on several highimpact one-time actions (e.g., home weatherisation, purchase of
energy-efficient home appliances and fuel-efficient vehicles),
whereas our work mostly examined frequently occurring behaviours (e.g., energy and water saving at home, recycling, food
waste) because the available experimental field evidence mostly
targeted frequently occurring behaviours. The possibility exists
that single action behaviours may be more effectively influenced
by behavioural interventions compared to recurring behaviours,
which may be more resistant to change if automatised in habitual
routines [32] . Although the roots for these discrepancies cannot be
conclusively uncovered, our results raise the possibility that these
past forecasts about how much can be achieved to reduce carbon
emissions by household action could apply only to some specific
best cases. This is a critical issue because Dietz et al. used their
results to estimate reductions in carbon emissions over 10 years
from household action. Our estimates about behavioural plasticity are more conservative than Dietz et al.’s. Future research
should further address these inconsistencies because, even after a
decade, Dietz et al. represent the benchmark estimates for the
reduction in carbon emissions that could be expected from
household action [1][,][3] —and these estimates are based on more
optimistic levels of behavioural plasticity and specific mitigation
behaviours compared to our work.
Thus, the available field experiments do not give rise to hopeful
predictions about relying on behavioural interventions alone to
tackle climate change. Our results show that it is unlikely that
behavioural interventions, in isolation, will help us achieve large
and pressing reductions in carbon emissions. There is, however,
the possibility that behavioural effects could vary depending on
the policy or economic forces concurrently in place, or that
specific combinations of behavioural interventions with legislation and/or financial incentives produce better results [33][–][35] .
Indeed, there is evidence strongly suggesting an interactive effect.
For instance, financial incentive programmes for home insulation
that required prior energy audits were less effective in promoting
conservation actions compared to programmes that offered
similar monetary incentives, but that did not involve requesting
an audit [36][,][37] . Another example provided by Stern and colleagues [38] reported that the same programme to install energy-saving
equipment in households produced very different uptake rates for
energy audits (up to a 20% difference), depending on the source
of the information letter received. These same authors reviewed
multiple conservation programmes in the U.S. combining both
financial and non-financial interventions and concluded that,
controlling for type and size of incentives, participation in conservation programmes could vary by a factor of 10, depending on
concomitant behavioural strategies, such as perceived social
norms or message framing. This evidence suggests that financial
incentives capture consumers’ attention, after which behavioural
interventions can have larger effects than if used in isolation. Our
findings, in combination with this seminal evidence, suggest that
researchers should focus more on interaction effects. An important issue to be further addressed is whether, and under what
conditions, specific behavioural interventions can make a substantial difference when integrated with other types of interventions to increase adoption of actions with a high potential to


reduce carbon emissions. This is an important issue because
behavioural interventions, like financial incentives and regulation,
typically fall short of expectations derived from untested
assumptions about behavioural plasticity. Interactions may be
where the greatest potential lies.
The need for more investment in rigorous impact evaluation is
pressing because the last decades have witnessed an unprecedented interest in climate change and thousands of papers have
been published on this topic. The abundance of research may lead
us to infer that much is already known about what promotes
behavioural changes towards climate change mitigation. Yet, the
reality is that high-quality field experiments, from which precise
effects can be estimated, are scarce. Not only are high-quality field
experiments rare but few set the specific goal to test interventions
to mitigate climate change and fight global warming. It is noteworthy that most studies from which estimates about transportation, food waste and meat consumption could be extracted were
not conducted to tackle climate change, but were borrowed from
trials on health promotion, e.g., reduce meat consumption to
increase vegetable intake; walk or cycle to work instead of using
the car to reduce obesity; reduced food waste as a proxy for lower
calories intake.

The fact that some estimates were borrowed from different
academic fields suggests the benefits that could be achieved in
future interdisciplinary collaboration. Conducting behavioural
interventions from an interdisciplinary perspective is crucial
particularly when implementing interventions that may combine
different stimuli, e.g., public service announcements, social
comparison and government action. Complex, multi-layered
interventions from the standpoint of their content and implementation may require the joint work of multiple experts. Also,
using advanced technological solutions for data collection may
also be more effectively implemented when combining behavioural scientists with technical expertise such as engineers and
computer scientists.
We propose six main recommendations for future (interdisciplinary) research examining complex issues such as global
warming. First, more research is needed to tackle behaviours with
high technical potential, that is, behaviours that greatly contribute
to reducing carbon emissions. Comparative estimates [19] showed
that, for the average household in North America and Europe, the
actions with the largest potential for carbon emissions reduction
are eating fewer animal products, reducing driving and flying, and
saving household energy, particularly from heating and cooling.
Programmes and initiatives targeting, for instance, recycling,
turning off the lights after leaving a room, or unplugging battery
chargers after use, also contribute to mitigate climate change, but
have substantially lower marginal effects—even if the interventions could achieve 100% behavioural plasticity. Ideally, interventions worthier of implementation should both achieve high
behavioural plasticity and target behaviours with high technical
potential.
Second, future research should implement research designs
that allow for causal inferences. Whereas all research designs are
valid tools for knowledge production, establishing causality
requires specific research designs. Not only RCTs can be used to
achieve this, but they are the gold-standard to test causal effects.
Future research should focus on establishing to what extent a
particular intervention—and that intervention alone—contributes
to behaviour change. This is established by a valid comparison
group which has the same characteristics, on average, as the
treatment group in the absence of the intervention, and remains
unaffected by the intervention. Randomised assignment of participants is the most recommended procedure to achieve a valid
comparison group. However, many real-world circumstances
prevent this randomisation, but researchers can turn to


8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications


-----

## NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 ARTICLE


alternative impact evaluation methods [39], such as interrupted time
series, instrumental variables (i.e., variables outside the control of
individuals that influence participation in the intervention but are
otherwise irrelevant), regression discontinuity design, differencesin-differences or matching (for when intervention assignment
rules are not clear). These more pragmatic, quasi-experimental
methods may be faster, cheaper and logistically more feasible
than RCTs, and could provide valuable information [40][,][41] . Results
should, nevertheless, be presented with due caution. Simple
before-and-after analyses, or descriptive comparisons of programmes with different characteristics provide the least trustworthy estimates.
Third, future work should try to isolate the main effects of
different behavioural stimuli (e.g., information, social comparison, environmental appeals), as well as the combined effect of
several behavioural stimuli, or their combined use with incentives
and regulations. The content of interventions needs to be tested
more precisely because a large proportion of interventions to date
implements bundles of stimuli from which the identification of
the key driver of effectiveness is difficult to grasp. The implicit
assumption behind combining stimuli is that the intervention is
more likely to be effective, the larger the number of stimuli
involved. But we should not automatically assume positive
additive or multiplicative effects just because a variety of actions
is taken in combination. It is crucial to estimate the additional
marginal contribution of multiple actions to mitigate climate
change. Conclusively establishing main versus interactive effects
requires comparative analyses, specifically designed for this purpose. As this work attests, ample research has been conducted in
the field randomly assigning individuals or households to different treatments. When such randomisation is possible, factorial
designs are an adequate tool to test main versus interaction
effects [42] . Testing these main versus interaction effects requires
only minor changes to the study design and potentially an
increase in sample size, mostly for discrete dependent variables [43] .
However, when individual or household-level randomisation is
not possible, cluster randomisation or quasi-experimental designs
can still be conducted using a factorial design [44] . In more
restrictive research contexts, researchers may use counterbalanced
designs [45][,][46], in which different treatments are implemented
stepwise. These treatments may include single stimulus and
bundles of stimuli, introduced and/or removed sequentially [47] .
Although the estimation of these effects may be more challenging
and less precise than with a true experimental design, these quasiexperimental alternatives may still shed some light about the
differential effects of single versus combined stimuli.
Fourth, researchers should continue to invest efforts in interventions targeting direct triggers of behaviour change, such as
social comparison messages and choice architecture (nudges).
Although such interventions have their own set of challenges
(e.g., unknown collateral effects of downward social comparisons,
or ethical concerns with consent and autonomy in nudge interventions), our results indicate these are the most effective interventions. For instance, choice architecture relies on people
preferring the path of least resistance, such as having to walk less
to the recycling bin or not giving a second look at the air conditioning temperature. This approach could be implemented in
less explored areas. For instance, utilities companies could
implement a default (opt-out) payment for renewable energy (e.g.
refs. [48][,][49] ). Moreover, the layout of cafeterias, restaurants and
supermarkets could be rearranged to display animal products in
less accessible areas. This is a strategy commonly used in health
promotion to reduce consumption of sugary foods, but seldom
used to fight climate change. Given the pressing need to change
the consumption patterns of millions of individuals and households, interventions should target proximal drivers of behaviour


—
change over and above the longstanding goal of changing
hearts and minds. This is recommended because, conversely,
traditional policy instruments such as public service announcements, statistics, consumption feedback, and energy labels, were
found to be the least effective ways to produce behavioural
change. The assumption about the positive role of information
seems to die hard, despite consistent evidence of its low impact.
Whereas this is an unsurprising result to behavioural scientists [25]
and some results have pointed in this direction [7], there is a considerable gap between what is known in behavioural science and
what is proposed and implemented by policy-makers. These
strategies continue to dominate the proposed solutions in the
latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report with respect to demand-side behaviour changes [1], and
the recently published randomised field trials persist on the idea
of testing information-based strategies to promote mitigation
behaviours (Supplementary References [3][,][18][,][48] ). Information-based
strategies are employed under the assumption that, when provided with facts and figures, people will adjust their behaviour
and monitor their actions that produce carbon emissions [50][,][51] .
Such assumptions are challenged by our results, estimating the
probability that information can produce positive changes in
3.4%. This is a result of paramount significance considering the
central role these strategies are expected to play in the fight
against global warming [52][,][53] . Nonetheless, there is still the need to
evaluate the conditions under which the effect of information
strategies may be boosted, for instance when combined with
financial incentives, or when delivered by trustworthy sources
and easily available at the point of decision [34][,][36][–][38] . Whereas
information has little impact to motivate unmotivated individuals, information may be crucial to guide behaviour once people
are fuelled by complementary, more motivating strategies.
Fifth, more evidence is needed to identify which interventions
can stand the test of time. Regarding whether behavioural
interventions have persistent effects once the intervention is
concluded, the available data showed an overall average null
effect. We could not provide a definitive answer on persistent
effects per specific type of intervention due to the small number
of papers that reported follow-up effects. Our current recommendations for more investment in interventions with the highest
behavioural plasticity potential (social comparison and nudges)
are based on effect sizes while the intervention is in place. Future
research may adjust these recommendations if evidence establishes that interventions with a more modest short-term impact
maintain their effect in follow-up periods, whereas more
impactful interventions may see their effect fade sharply after the
intervention is concluded. Habit is one of the persistence pathways proposed to explain sustained effects [54] . Research on habit
formation has shown that action repetition, particularly under the
same environmental cues, is critical to establish new habits [55][,][56] .
Therefore, the expectation could be that, the longer the intervention, the more likely it is to create a positive habit in recurring
contexts. Yet, holding all factors constant, the intervention
duration did not have an effect. This is puzzling, to some extent,
because most household actions examined in our work are frequent and recurrent in stable settings (e.g., turning on the air
conditioning at home, driving to work, selecting meal size and
type). Our work included very heterogeneous research contexts
and behaviours, possibly with different timescales required for
change to happen, which may have masked the effect of intervention duration. Other persistence pathways include changing
how people think (e.g., beliefs), changing future costs of mitigation behaviours (e.g., energy-efficient appliances), and external
reinforcement (either social or financial). There is no conclusive
answer on how to succeed in these pathways, or which one is
more effective. Nonetheless, isolated examples show that evidence


NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 9


-----

## ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2


for changing future costs is not compelling [57] but some interventions using social comparison (external reinforcement), and
nudges (automatic habit reshape) have reported persistent effects.
Ferraro and colleagues [5] report that the impact from a single social
comparison treatment could be detected more than 2 years after
this one-shot intervention (1.3% less water consumption in the
treatment group). Allcott and Rogers [58] report that, after a 2-year
intervention using social comparisons to reduce energy
consumption, effects persisted when the intervention was dis
–
continued, decaying at 10 20% per year. Regarding nudges,
Kurz [59] showed that a 3-month layout change in a restaurant
produced a persistent reduction in meat consumption by 4% in
the following 3 months after the intervention ended. These
examples suggest social comparison and nudges may be good
options to transform transient behaviour changes into sustained
behavioural patterns. Nonetheless, future research should establish more precisely when and why intervention effects persist.
Given that most behavioural interventions seem to be shortlived, incorporating multiple, sequential intervention components
could be a promising solution. Relevant to this debate are the
concepts of complex and adaptive interventions [60][,][61] —interventions composed of various interconnecting parts that emphasise

—
the timing and sequence for different treatment(s) as a way to
adjust treatment response to circumvent saturation effects during
implementation, and to promote sustained effects after implementation is concluded [60] . Applied to climate change research,
an adaptive complex intervention could start with a social comparison message, after which it could shift to (or add) an
information-based strategy, and conclude with a change to (or an
extra added) environmental appeal to save the planet. However, a
challenge for these sequential designs is what theoretical basis
justifies the order selected and tipping point for adjustment [61] . In
line with our previous arguments, a sequence of interventions
should probably start with motivating, eye-catching strategies
(e.g., social comparison, financial incentives), to subsequently
move to (or add-on) more information-based interventions, once
attention for climate change has been grabbed. The analysis of
temporal dynamics in such cumulative designs could contribute
both to providing evidence on whether interventions should be
adaptive over time, along with contributing to our understanding
of how stimuli bundle works (third recommendation).
Sixth, future research should enrol, to the extent possible, naïve
participants. Our results showed a sevenfold difference between
studies that required participants’ explicit consent versus studies
that had no such requirement. One explanation for this effect is
that people that accept to enrol in environmental studies are more
interested in climate change mitigation than people that decline
such invitations. Moreover, participants that provide consent are
aware that their behaviour is monitored, thus leading to greater
desire to conform to what is normative [62] . Researchers may correct this bias by using publicly available data, requesting waived
informed consent due to compelling validity concerns [63], monitoring non-participants, at least at the aggregate level, and/or
correcting for the estimates collected with non-naïve participants.
This is an important question because scaling-up and implementing these interventions in a larger scale, possibly designed as
policy-level action, necessarily targets a much wider variety of
individuals with varying motivation to act pro-environmentally.
Using the estimates from self-selected participants to inform
policy makers creates an expectation that may not be matched
when targeting larger populational segments.
In summary, our work speaks to the preferred options within
the universe of behavioural interventions. Based on the best
evidence currently available, our recommendation is to increase
the use of nudges and social comparison interventions, given that
both types of interventions are independent of individuals’


motivation to mitigate climate change. Furthermore, we recommend, firstly, targeting the most impactful behaviours to achieve
carbon reductions. Secondly, using RCTs or other research
designs that allow to establish causality. Thirdly, measuring tangible behaviour changes, both in while the intervention lasts and
after the intervention has been concluded (follow-up period).
Lastly, testing the interventions in naïve participants. Taken
together, our results should not be used to argue for a disinvestment in behavioural interventions because this work did not
compare behavioural interventions with alternative approaches,
nor did it examine their interactive effect with other strategies.
Ultimately, our work shows that mitigating climate change via
voluntary behavioural changes in households and individuals is a
real challenge—not that behavioural interventions are less effective than alternative approaches.
Some limitations of our analysis should be discussed. Intrinsic
to the nature of meta-analyses, results depend on the scope and
quality of the available empirical evidence. Therefore, our results
are as good as the raw materials available to inform our analysis.
An additional limitation is related to the outcome standardisation
as Cohen’s d. This enabled us to compare the effect sizes of
different interventions in different contexts but disallowed the
translation of effect sizes into meaningful savings, such as kWh,
liters, or kilograms. Although we cannot precise the carbon
emission reductions derived from the effect sizes reported here,
these are indubitably small, particularly in light of the ambitious
goals set for carbon emissions reduction. Another limitation
worth mentioning is the small number of contexts in which
nudges have been tested, mostly targeting reduced meat consumption and food waste. Although we recommend this type of
intervention due to the higher effect sizes reported, this strategy
has seldom been tested in behaviours with high technical impact,
such as energy consumption or private car use—where the
greatest gains for carbon reductions can be achieved. A final
limitation relates to our strict inclusion criteria may have excluded important behaviours. For instance, there were no RCTs
testing behavioural interventions to reduce air travel, increase the
use of renewable energy or purchase of electric cars. There are,
nonetheless, multiple studies addressing these topics using nonexperimental designs, self-reported attitudes or simulating the
effects of implementing government subsidies. Such papers were
excluded due to our methodological choices. While our inclusion
criteria may have restricted or limited the behaviours examined, it
nevertheless increased the reliability and ecological validity of the
estimates that we were able to calculate—which were sizeable in
terms of sample size, behaviours and interventions examined, and
total number of papers.

Materials and methods
Literature search and data extraction. This meta-analysis followed the procedures and guidelines established by the Cochrane Group [64] and the PRISMA
Statement [65] (Supplementary Table 1). We conducted electronic and manual
searches from inception to 30 June 2018 in the main international databases
(EBSCO Business Source Complete, EconLit, PsycNET, JSTOR) as well as
unpublished grey literature and Google Scholar. References from previous reviews
were hand-searched. The full search strategy is presented here: [((Energy OR
electricity OR gas OR towel OR water OR heating OR cooling OR drying OR Food
OR meal OR Meat OR beef OR dairy OR (air travel) OR fly OR car OR vehicle OR
airline) AND ((((reduc* OR decreas* OR low* OR mitigat* OR limit* OR control)
AND (wast* OR excess OR discart* OR surplus OR leftover OR consum* OR use OR
eat OR purchas* OR demand OR driv*)) OR ((Recycl* OR reuse OR ((waste OR
garbage OR trash OR plastic OR cart OR can OR glass OR paper) AND sort*)) AND
((public transport*) OR (bike OR bicycle OR bus OR subway OR (car pool*) OR (trip
chain) OR (car shar*) OR ((fuel efficien* OR electric) AND (car OR vehicle))) AND
(Efficien* OR (energy saving)) AND (appliance OR fridge OR dryer OR (air conditioning)) AND (Vegetarian OR vegan) AND ((increas* OR improv* OR promot*
OR foster) AND (efficien* OR sav*)))] AND (experiment OR (field stud*) OR
intervention OR (random AND (select OR allocat*)) OR (control group) OR (comparison group)))]


10 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications


-----

## NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 ARTICLE


The flow diagram (Supplementary Fig. 1) depicts the flow of information
through the different phases of our systematic review. Initial searches held 29,820
electronic records. After duplicates were removed (N = 13,562), at a first stage of
screening, the criterion of experimental design eliminated 6376 records, whereas
the criterion of observed behavioural outcomes removed an additional 8593
records. A more extensive screening was performed on a working sample of 1289
papers. A final selection at this stage was based on removing quasi-experimental or
pretest–posttest studies without a control group, papers without proper statistics
reported and studies reporting group-level changes (e.g., per buildings, student
halls, employee departments) without any link to individual-level behaviour
changes.
The final sample according to the inclusion criteria covered 83 studies,
providing a total of 157 estimates. Not all estimates were unique, meaning several
originated from the same dataset which violates independence of observations and
induces same data/author bias. These 157 estimates were used only when subgroup
comparisons were made. For instance, if the same study reported estimates on the
effect of an intervention in walking, cycling and car use, only a randomly selected
estimate was used to estimate the global effect for transportation but they were all
used if the goal was to estimate the specific effect in walking or cycling). Only 144
estimates are unique, that is, from independent datasets. These final 144 estimates
are publicly available [66] and the papers from which these estimates were extracted
are listed in Supplementary References.
Three reviewers (lead author and two research assistants) independently
assessed initial titles and abstracts, which were excluded only if all reviewers agreed
that the trial did not meet eligibility criteria. Full-text articles of remaining citations
were retrieved and assessed for inclusion by all reviewers. Disagreements were
resolved by consensus. Results published only in abstract form were not included
unless adequate details were available for quality assessment. We designed and
used a structured data abstraction form. The reviewers abstracted data from each
study and evaluated the completeness of the data for extraction. Differences in
quality ratings were resolved by discussion or by involving an additional reviewer.
The following data were extracted: study, country of origin, setting, type of
intervention, target population, sample size and participant self-selection
(Supplementary Data 1).

Data standardisation. The dependent variables under analysis were objective
behavioural changes measured as factual variations, for instance, in energy usage
(kilowatts [kW]), water usage (litres), quantity of recycled materials or food wasted
(in kgs). (This criterion was weakened in the context of transportation trials.
Several transportation trials did not directly measure behaviour but have higherquality proxies than other contexts, such as diaries with exact number of kilometres
driven or number of days per week that car rides were replaced by public transportation.) Given the large variation in outcomes reported between studies (e.g.,
all measurements to standardise mean differences (SMD) or Cohenfrequencies, means and standard deviations, regression coefficients) we converted’s d. SMD
converts the results of multiple studies into a uniform scale before these can be
combined, expressing the size of the intervention effect in each study relative to its
observed variability. The average estimates presented are negative because we
estimated how much an intervention reduces the use of natural resources (e.g.,
reduced energy and water consumption or food waste). We multiplied by −1 the
estimates in the few cases where an increase is beneficial (e.g., recycling or purchase
or efficient appliances) to ensure that all measurements are in the same direction [31] .
Cluster randomised studies, i.e., with randomisation performed at the group-level,
were adjusted for an ‘inflation factor’ (IF) [67] . For trials randomising clusters of
average size m to two or more intervention groups, this factor can be estimated
approximately by IF = 1 + (m−1)ρ, where ρ is the sample estimate of the intracluster correlation. The effective sample size for the trial is then given approximately by N/IF, where N is the total number of subjects enroled.
We used the Effect Size Calculator from the Campbell Collaboration for the
conversion and standardisation of the dependent variables. Only the POB was
calculated manually, estimated from SMD/√2 [22] . The Campbell Collaboration
[https://www.campbellcollaboration.org/ is a leading organisation for evidence](https://www.campbellcollaboration.org/)
synthesis and meta-analysis production. This organisation developed a tool to
support scholars and practitioners that run complex meta-analysis, which requires
outcome conversions and standardisation. This tool is the Effect Size Calculator
[https://www.campbellcollaboration.org/research-resources/research-for-resources/](https://www.campbellcollaboration.org/research-resources/research-for-resources/effect-size-calculator.html)
[effect-size-calculator.html.](https://www.campbellcollaboration.org/research-resources/research-for-resources/effect-size-calculator.html)
The procedure was as follows: for each individual paper in our sample, we
extracted their reported outcomes—typically reported as t-test, regression
coefficients + SE, means + SDs, percentages, etc. We inputted these estimates plus
the sample size for each individual study in the calculator. The calculator thenreturns an estimate for Cohen’s d, its variance and the 95% CI. These are then the
estimates transferred to STATA to perform the meta-analysis. We present the
sample sizes per condition in the columns N_EG (sample size for the experimental
group) and N_CG (sample size for the control group) in the STATA database
(Supplementary Data 1).

Data analysis. We conducted a random-effects meta-analysis, pooling study-level
data using STATA IC14 (R using metagen or rma (seemetaan command “Code availability) [68] (These analyses can be replicated in” statement below)). We used the


most common approach to modelling between-study variance, the
DerSimonian–Laird (DL) model. Metaan dl assumes that the true effect can be
different for each study and that the individual-study effects are distributed with a
variance Τ [2] around an overall true effect. Summary estimates are reported with
95% CIs and stratified by different interventions. Statistical heterogeneity was
assessed with the I² statistic [28], which describes the percentage of variation across
studies that is due to heterogeneity rather than chance. It is an intuitive and simpleexpression of the inconsistency of studies’ results. A confidence interval for I² is
constructed by metaan using the iterative non-central chi-squared distribution
method of Hedges and Piggott (2001) described in [64] .
Meta-regression models [29] were estimated to examine the effect of key
moderator variables (metareg command). Publication bias was visually explored
using funnel plots [69] (confunnel command) and the Egger´s test (metabias
command) [31] . A funnel plot is a scatterplot used for detecting systematic
heterogeneity by presenting the distribution of treatment effect against a
precision measure (standard error). To statistically assess the role of small
sample studies in potentially biasing overall estimates of effectiveness, we
conducted the Egger´s test which regresses the intervention effect estimates on
their standard errors.
Cumulative meta-analysis was performed using the metacum command [70] . In
cumulative meta-analysis, the pooled estimate of the treatment effect is updated
each time the results of a new study are included. This makes it possible to track
the accumulation of evidence on the effect of interventions over time. The circles in
the plot represent the cumulative effect size at any given moment, i.e., the average
effect size resulting from the inclusion of studies up to a certain point. There is not
an ‘average’ effect size per year, but each individual study is ordered and added by
year of publication. Cumulative meta-analysis is not additive, i.e., it is not the sum
of individual studies. Meta-analytic procedures are weighted averages and thus
cumulative meta-analysis is an updated average effect size over time.

Data availability
The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available
within the paper and its supplementary information files. We provide a Source Data File
[that is publicly available at Figshare [https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9641999]. This](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9641999)
Source Data provides all underlying data for Table 1 and Figs. 1–6.

Code availability
All commands used in STATA are publicly available:
[metaan https://www.stata-journal.com/article.html?article = st0201](https://www.stata-journal.com/article.html?article=st0201)
[metareg https://www.stata-journal.com/article.html?article = sbe23_1](https://www.stata-journal.com/article.html?article=sbe23_1)
[metabias https://www.stata-journal.com/sjpdf.html?articlenum = sbe19_6](https://www.stata-journal.com/sjpdf.html?articlenum=sbe19_6)
[confunnel https://www.stata-journal.com/sjpdf.html?articlenum = gr0033](https://www.stata-journal.com/sjpdf.html?articlenum=gr0033)
[metacum http://fmwww.bc.edu/RePEc/bocode/m/metacum.html](http://fmwww.bc.edu/RePEc/bocode/m/metacum.html)
These analyses can be replicated in R using metagen or rma, and these R codes are
[publicly available at Figshare [https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9641999].](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9641999)

Received: 26 October 2018; Accepted: 29 August 2019;

References
1. Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C. Global Warming of 1.5 °C. An
IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 °C Above Preindustrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the
Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change
(IPCC, 2018).
2. Schot, J., Kanger, L. & Verbong, G. The roles of users in shaping transitions to
new energy systems. Nat. Energy 1, 16054–16061 (2016).
3. Stern, P. C. et al. Opportunities and insights for reducing fossil fuel
consumption by households and organizations. Nat. Energy 1, 16043–16049
(2016).
4. Allcott, H. & Mullainathan, S. Behavioural science and energy policy. Science
327, 1204–1205 (2010).
5. Ferraro, P. J., Miranda, J. J. & Price, M. K. The persistence of treatment effects
with norm based policy instruments: evidence from a randomized
environmental policy experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 318–322 (2011).
6. Nolan, J. M., Schultz, P. W., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J. & Griskevicius, V.
Normative social influence is underdetected. Personal Soc. Psychol. Bull. 34,
913–923 (2008).
7. Davis, A. L., Krishnamurti, T., Fischhoff, B. & Bruine de Bruin, W. Setting a
standard for electricity pilot studies. Energy Policy 62, 401–409 (2013).
8. Sinn, H. W. The green paradox: a supply-side view of the climate problem.
Rev. Environ. Econ. Policy 9, 239–245 (2015).
9. [United States Department of Agriculture. Meat Price Spreads. https://www.ers.](https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/meat-price-spreads/)
[usda.gov/data-products/meat-price-spreads/ (2018).](https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/meat-price-spreads/)


NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11


-----

## ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2


10. Delmas, M. A., Fischlein, M. & Asensio, O. I. Information strategies and
energy conservation behaviour: a meta-analysis of experimental studies from
1975 to 2012. Energy Policy 61, 729–739 (2013).
11. Lokhorst, A. M., Werner, C., Staats, H., van Dijk, E. & Gale, J. L. Commitment
and behaviour change: a meta-analysis and critical review of commitmentmaking strategies in environmental research. Environ. Behav. 45, 3–34 (2011).
12. Osbaldiston, R. & Schott, J. P. Environmental sustainability and behavioural
science: meta-analysis of proenvironmental behaviour experiments. Environ.
Behav. 44, 257–299 (2012).
13. Miafodzyeva, S. & Brandt, N. Recycling behaviour among householders:
synthesizing determinants via a meta-analysis. Waste Biomass Valori 4,
221–235 (2013).
14. Abrahamse, W. & Steg, L. Social influence approaches to encourage resource
conservation: a meta-analysis. Glob. Environ. Change 23, 1773–1785 (2013).
15. Steiner, P. M., Cook, T. D., Shadish, W. R. & Clark, M. H. The importance of
covariate selection in controlling for selection bias in observational studies.
Psychol. Methods 15, 250–267 (2010).
16. Andreasen, A. R. Rethinking the relationship between social/nonprofit
marketing and commercial marketing. J. Public Policy Mark. 31, 36–41 (2012).
17. Webb, T. L. & Sheeran, P. Does changing behavioural intentions engender
behaviour change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol.
Bull. 132, 249–268 (2006).
18. Dietz, T., Gardner, G. T., Gilligan, J., Stern, P. C. & Vandenbergh, M. P.
Household actions can provide a behavioural wedge to rapidly reduce US
carbon emissions. PNAS 106, 18452–18456 (2009).
19. Lacroix, K. Comparing the relative mitigation potential of individual proenvironmental behaviors. J. Clean Prod. 195, 1398–1407 (2018).
20. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Food wastage footprint and
[Climate Change. Technical Report. http://www.fao.org/3/a-bb144e.pdf (2015).](http://www.fao.org/3/a-bb144e.pdf)
21. US Department of Energy. Saving Water Saves Energy. Technical Report.

[https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/927020 (2006).](https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/927020)
22. Berger, Michael A., Hans, Liesel, Piscopo, Kate, & Sohn, Michael D. Exploring
the Energy Benefits of Advanced Water Metering. US Department of Energy.
[Technical Report. https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1345196-exploring-energy-](https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1345196-exploring-energy-benefits-advanced-water-metering)
[benefits-advanced-water-metering (2016).](https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1345196-exploring-energy-benefits-advanced-water-metering)
23. US Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]. Advancing Sustainable Materials
[Management: 2014 Fact Sheet. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/](https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-11/documents/2014_smmfactsheet_508.pdf)
[2016-11/documents/2014_smmfactsheet_508.pdf (2016).](https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-11/documents/2014_smmfactsheet_508.pdf)
24. Egger, M. & Smith, G. D. Bias in location and selection of studies. BMJ 316,
61–66 (1998).
25. Sustein, C., & Thaler, R. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth,
and Happiness (Yale University Press, New Haven, 2008).
26. Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioural Sciences (L. Lawrence
Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1988).
27. McGraw, K. O. & Wong, S. P. A common language effect size statistic. Psychol.
Bull. 111, 361–365 (1992).

‐
28. Higgins, J. P. & Thompson, S. G. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta
analysis. Stat. Med. 21, 1539–1558 (2002).
29. Harbord, R. M. & Higgins, J. P. T. Meta-regression in stata. Stata J. 8, 493–519
(2008).
30. Harbord, R. M., Harris, R. J. & Sterne, J. A. C. Updated tests for small-study
effects in meta-analyses. Stata J. 9, 197–210 (2009).
31. Steichen, T. J., Egger, M. & Sterne, J. Modification of the metabias program.
Stata Tech. Bull. 44, 3 (1998).
32. Webb, T. L., Sheeran, P. & Luszczynska, A. Planning to break unwanted
habits: Habit strength moderates implementation intention effects on
behaviour change. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 48, 507–523 (2009).
33. Stern, P. C. Contributions of psychology to limiting climate change. Am.
Psychol. 66, 303–314 (2011).
34. Wolske, K. S. & Stern, P. C. Contributions of psychology to limiting climate
change: opportunities through consumer behavior. In Psychology and Climate
Change (eds. Clayton, S. & Manning, C.) 127–160 (Academic Press, 2018).
35. Swim, J. K. et al. Psychology’s contributions to understanding and addressing
global climate change. Am. Psychol. 66, 241–250 (2011).
36. Stern, P. C. Information, incentives, and proenvironmental consumer
behavior. J. Consum. Policy 22, 461–478 (1999).
37. Stern, P. C. et al. The effectiveness of incentives for residential energy
conservation. Eval. Rev. 10, 147–176 (1985).
38. Stern, P. C. Blind spots in policy analysis: what economics doesn’t say about
energy use. J. Policy Anal. Manag. 5, 200–227 (1986).
39. Gertler, P. J., Martinez, S., Premand, P., Rawlings, L. B., & Vermeersch, C. M.
[Impact Evaluation in Practice https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/](https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/978-1-4648-0779-4)
[978-1-4648-0779-4 (The World Bank, 2016).](https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/978-1-4648-0779-4)
40. Kontopantelis, E., Doran, T., Springate, D. A., Buchan, I. & Reeves, D.
Regression based quasi-experimental approach when randomisation is not an
option: interrupted time series analysis. BMJ 350, h2750 1-4 (2015).
41. Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Farrell, M. H. & Titiunik, R. Regression
discontinuity designs using covariates. RevEcon Stat. 101, 442–451 (2018).


42. Montgomery, A. A., Peters, T. J. & Little, P. Design, analysis and presentation of
factorial randomised controlled trials. BMC Med. Res. Method 3, 26–31 (2003).
43. Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G. & Buchner, A. G* Power 3: a flexible
statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical
sciences. Behav. Res. Methods 39, 175–191 (2007).
44. Bol, L., Hacker, D. J., Walck, C. C. & Nunnery, J. A. The effects of individual
or group guidelines on the calibration accuracy and achievement of high
school biology students. Contemp. Educ. Psychol. 37, 280–287 (2012).
45. Siegel, J. T. et al. A quasi-experimental investigation of message appeal variations
on organ donor registration rates. Health Psychol. 27, 170–178 (2008).
46. Sarkies, M. N. et al. A novel counterbalanced implementation study design:
methodological description and application to implementation research.
Implement Sci. 14, 45–56 (2019).
47. Hemming, K., Haines, T. P., Chilton, P. J., Girling, A. J. & Lilford, R. J. The
stepped wedge cluster randomised trial: rationale, design, analysis, and
reporting. BMJ 350, h391 1-7 (2015).
48. Momsen, K. & Stoerk, T. From intention to action: can nudges help
consumers to choose renewable energy? Energy Policy 74, 376–382 (2014).
49. Sunstein, C. R. & Reisch, L. A. Green by default. Kyklos 66, 398–402 (2013).
50. Dilling, L. & Lemos, M. C. Creating usable science: opportunities and
constraints for climate knowledge use and their implications for science
policy. Glob. Environ. Change 21, 680–689 (2011).
51. Ming Lee, T., Markowitz, E. M., Howe, P. D., Ko, C.-Y. & Leiserowitz, A. A.
Predictors of public climate change awareness and risk perception around the
world. Nat. Clim. Change 5, 1014–1019 (2015).
52. Carroll, J., Lyons, S. & Denny, E. Reducing household electricity demand
through smart metering: the role of improved information about energy
saving. Energy Econ. 45, 234–243 (2014).
53. Howell, R. Investigating the long-term impacts of climate change
communications on individuals’ attitudes and behaviour. Environ. Behav. 46,
70–101 (2012).
54. Frey, E. & Rogers, T. Persistence: how treatment effects persist after
interventions stop. Policy Insights Behav. Brain Sci. 1, 172–179 (2014).
55. Thrailkill, E. A. & Bouton, M. E. Contextual control of instrumental actions
and habits. J. Exp. Psychol.-Anim. L 41, 69–80 (2015).
56. Lally, P., Van Jaarsveld, C. H., Potts, H. W. & Wardle, J. How are habits
formed: modelling habit formation in the real world. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 40,
998–1009 (2010).
57. Lucas, D., Fuchs, A. & Gertler, P. Cash for coolers: evaluating a large-scale
appliance replacement program in Mexico. Am. Econ. J.-Econ. Policy 6,
207–238 (2014).
58. Allcott, H. & Rogers, T. The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral
interventions: experimental evidence from energy conservation. Am. Econ.
Rev. 104, 3003–3037 (2014).
59. Kurz, V. Nudging to reduce meat consumption: immediate and persistent
effects of an intervention at a university restaurant. J. Environ. Econ. Manag.
90, 317–341 (2018).
60. Craig, P. et al. Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the new
Medical Research Council guidance. BMJ 337, a1655 1-6 (2008).
61. Miller, C. K. Adaptive intervention designs to promote behavioral change in
adults: what is the evidence? Curr. Diab. Rep. 19, 7–16 (2019).
62. Schwartz, D., Fischhoff, B., Krishnamurti, T. & Sowell, F. The Hawthorne
effect and energy awareness. PNAS 110, 15242–15246 (2013).
63. Rebers, S., Aaronson, N. K., Van Leeuwen, F. E. & Schmidt, M. K. Exceptions
to the rule of informed consent for research with an intervention. BMC Med.

Ethics 17, 9–20 (2016).
64. Higgins, J. P. T. & Green, S. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions, Vol. 4. Version 5.1.0 updated March 2011 (The Cochrane
Collaboration, 2011).
65. Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J. & Altman, D. G. Preferred reporting items
for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Ann.
Intern. Med. 151, 264–269 (2009).
[66. Nisa, C., et al. 2019 NComms. Figshare https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9641999)
[figshare.9641999 (2019).](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.9641999)
67. Donner, A. & Klar, N. Issues in the meta-analysis of cluster randomized trials.
Stat. Med. 21, 2971–2980 (2002).
68. Kontopantelis, E. & Reeves, D. Metaan: random-effects meta-analysis. Stata J.
10, 395–407 (2010).
69. Sterne, J. A. & Harbord, R. M. Funnel plots in meta-analysis. Stata J. 4,
127–141 (2004).
70. Lau, J. et al. Cumulative meta-analysis of therapeutic trials for myocardial
infarction. N. Engl. J. Med. 327, 248–254 (1992).

Acknowledgements

—
This work was funded by New York University Internal Funding University Research
Challenge Fund (URCF) (7271260ADHPGRA300). The first author acknowledges the


12 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications


-----

## NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 ARTICLE


funding and extensive support of ETH-Zurich and Future Resilient Systems (FRS) at

–
the Singapore-ETH Center (SEC) in early stages of this work (2015 2016), namely
Professors Renate Schubert and Hans Heinimann, Director Remo Burkhard, Martina
Cecchini, Jiang Zhengyi, Xing Zhang, Yunfeng Lu and Aaron Ang. We acknowledge
the support and collaboration from Dr. David Holland and the Center for Global Sea
Level Change.

Author contributions

C.F.N. was involved in all stages of this work, from inception, data search and extraction,
data analysis and manuscript preparation. J.J.B. and B.M.S. contributed to manuscript
preparation and submission. D.G.F. contributed to data analysis, namely the identification and analysis of the R codes equivalent to the STATA commands used, and figure
editing.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

[Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2)

[019-12457-2.](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2)

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.F.N.


Peer review information Nature Communications thanks PeiYi (Patricia) Kuo,
Paul Stern and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

[Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints)

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless

indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the

article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
[the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[licenses/by/4.0/.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

© The Author(s) 2019


NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:4545 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 13


-----

